Robert Kurwitz
    DIVINE AND SCARY SCENT
    Translation from Estonian.
    Our heart knows no rest until it rests in You.
    - Blessed Augustine
   

▲
1. CHARLOTTEYAL
⬍
    1. CHARLOTTESYAL
    This resort area on the outskirts of Vaasa swallowed up four girls, the Lund sisters. Together with their thin bones and tanned skin, an entire era faded into oblivion. Six kilometers of winding shoreline, a popular beach in the fifties; changing booths lined up, the wind rustling in the reeds. These are the times conservatives weep for. Times when parents could send their kids to the beach unsupervised, with two reals in their shorts pockets - for fare and ice cream. Fathers and mothers shook their heads anxiously and hid news from their children from Messina, from Graade, from Gottwald, where it seemed that every week they found the remains of little skeletons in the ovens. There every week someone's daughter would climb out of the cellar where she had been held for thirty years and call for help.
    There - but not here.
    Here is social democracy. Social Democracy's delicate peach blossoms, its caring social programs, its progressive approach will heal even the most crippled soul. In this reserved land, no one will be visited by the strange technical idea of equipping a secret room in the basement - with a vent whose exterior openings are disguised by garden figures in the shape of windmills. All these gloomy fantasies of the heated mind cool down and dissolve into a cool mist; the breath of distant blue glaciers freezes these painful thoughts in their heads. Vaasa. This is where you would like to live.
    But one Tuesday morning, with white clouds streaming across the blue sky, the four Lund sisters-Charlotte (14), Moline (13), Anni-Elin (12), and May (5)-go to the beach. They take with them two reals in cash, four bathing suits, food and drinks, and two large towels in two beach bags. At 9:30 they board the conch in Lovisa, a suburb of Vaasa. The convoy driver remembers them well. Today, twenty years later, is a significant day for Roland, who lives in a nursing home, because he can finally tell about it: "The oldest bought tickets for everyone. To Charlotteville. Forty senims. Ten a ticket. If they had gone to a stop farther, the ticket would have cost twenty centimes by now. I remember that very well. That's where the long-distance lines start, the fare is twice as high. My God, what a beauty! And how courteous! The eldest, Šar-lot-ta! - the old man chants. - I didn't know it then, I read it in the newspaper. As soon as I read it, I went straight to the police, every second counts.
    At 10:25, the girls get off the Conca at Charlotteville. Each in turn thanks the driver - that's how well-mannered they are. It's a hot morning on the beach, and not many people.
    There the girls are met by Agneta, the ice cream lady. Twenty years ago Agneta was still in college, and in the summer she worked part-time selling ice cream. Moline and Anni-Elin buy four portions: two vanilla, one with lime and one chocolate. The other girls are not seen in the store. The curtains on the windows are down, only the window next to the counter where the window display is open. There are few customers on a weekday morning; young Agneta knows the girls and remembers their preferences. Mint, Moline's favorite ice cream, is not on sale that day, so there is a slight hitch. In addition to ice cream, the girls, contrary to usual, buy three fried meat patties. The total of one real fifty centimes. The girls leave the store and through the open window next to the counter Agnetha notices a man standing next to them. Agnetha does not remember anything about the man. Neither his age, nor his height, nor how he was dressed, nor whether he was alone, and - as Agneta later began to wonder - whether he was there at all.
    This is the last time anyone sees the girls.
    The four daughters of Ann-Margret Lund, two days before she became Minister of Education, and the paper manufacturer Carl Lund disappear without a trace. The press coverage of the case turns into a multi-year affair. Every detail is reported in the newspapers, and the story of the Lund sisters is etched deeply into the nation's memory. Their disappearance becomes one of the highest-profile unsolved cases in the Real Zone.
    Around 12:40 p.m., five hours and twenty minutes before 6 p.m., when the girls are due home in Lovisa, and about thirty minutes before they buy ice cream, the three boys are sitting in the living room. The sun peeking through the blinds draws golden streaks on the walls of the room; the boys are classmates of two of the sisters. A tall, freckled boy holds a telephone receiver to his ear.
    "Just call already," the blond boy hurriedly said, peeking out from behind him.
    "It's kind of ugly to call three hours earlier than arranged," the freckled man hesitated.
    A fat immigrant from Ilmaraa pulls him by the sleeve:
    "Come on, Teresh, make the call. There's something wrong!"
    "I know, I know," Teresh says, and the steel dial of the phone jingles under his finger.
    The deafening roar of time, the most terrible sound in the world, approaches. Through the window in the golden room pours not light, but an impenetrable gray haze. All distances in it are insurmountable, and instead of space, all objects are surrounded by horror vacui.

▲
2. MEETING OF CLASSMATES
⬍
    2. MEETING OF CLASSMATES
    Inayat Khan pours himself a morsel. A little pink liquid drips from his chin onto his tie. The suit doesn't fit well, the buttons are about to come off. He looks like an idiot.
    "Fat idiot in a blue tie," he thinks. - I shouldn't have come in the first place.
    "Go and see your friends! Who were you friends with? That one, von Fersen, was a good boy. И..."
    "He's not my friend, he's a psycho-terrorist. I couldn't stand him, the mean upstart!"
    "... He made a very respectable man..."
    "A careerist and a slippery man, that's what he was, and a racist, too. I remember what he called me-mom, tell me, what did he call me?"
    "...and Teresh, and Jesper! Yes, Jesper is famous now too..."
    "Camel shit." Mom, he called me camel shit.
    Han watches as the magnetic tape slides across the reader. The coils spin hypnotically inside the machine, the magnetic field becomes music, a slow song - and for a moment he thinks he sees specks of light floating across the floor and walls of the auditorium again. Like stars in the sky or a swarm of jellyfish deep beneath the water. The stars glide across Moline Lund's white dress, Han's palm at her waist damp with excitement. What to say? Time stops, the music falls silent, and Moline Lund's dark green eyes are reflected in the thick glasses of Han's glasses.
    Håll mig här...
    "Ahh..." - Some woman appears nearby, probably from the parallel class. She wants to say something, but then pretends to just reach for her sandwich. None of them come. Han is alone, and the woman dressed in her pantsuit is still in her pantsuit. This is no good, we have to do something about it.
    Khan pulls a fountain pen with a secret from his pocket. Behind its transparent case, the chairman of the Presidium of the Samara People's Republic, Sapurmat Knezhinsky, smiles heartily at the camera with his historic black and white smile. To his left at the bulwark stands a rat-faced man dressed in a black leather coat of a secret police agent. "Look, the disappearing commissioner!" - Han says and turns the knob. The rat-like type behind the glass disappears. Only the Chairman of the Presidium himself, Sapurmat Knezhinsky, and the sycophantic Ukhtomsky, known for his failed critical speeches, remain on deck. Where the commissar was, there is now only a railing. You can also see part of the bridge, which he used to block.
    "Very interesting," says the woman in the pantsuit, looking over her shoulder. Han removes a clinging strand of hair from his forehead. He still holds a pen in his other hand; he continues to stare at her, smiling absently and muttering to himself: "there's a commissioner, there's no commissioner."
    The smile smolders for a moment on his round, double-chin face, and then disappears. Han's large, sad eyes watch the bustle of the adults in the school auditorium. There, the graduates of the fifty-sixth year call each other by name. Shaking hands, showing pictures of children in purses.
   
    There is a commissioner. There is no commissioner.
   
    In a spacious room, a man in his thirties is sitting on the parquet floor. He is an interior designer. The parquet is newly varnished; blond bangs fall on the man's forehead. The designer sits with his legs crossed portly, his elegant white hands resting on his knees. Raising his eyes, he sees in the huge floor-to-ceiling windows the reflection of the room. In the semi-darkness behind him, he sees the skeletal outline of minimalist designer furniture, a kitchen area with a stone countertop, and analog speakers-two silent obelisks. A lonely ghost hovers over the room: a beige Perseus Black half-coat on a rack and white suede shoes for three thousand reais on the shoe rack below it.
    A turn of the dimmer and the light dims. The reflection of the room disappears, and a sea of ferns appears outside the windows. The edge of the dark green carpet is lost in the darkness under the spruces. Sitting here, the designer usually listens to music, but today it's so quiet that you can hear the raindrops clattering against the ferns.
    When Jesper de la Gardie was in his twenties, he and his associates, snorting large quantities of cocaine, developed the world-famous design language Illdad minimal. They shuttled between cafe toilets of the Architects Association and prestigious interior design bureaus, sipping water from bottles and congratulating each other on their cutting-edge invention: "Our project will rule the world, through this language of images we will define people's perceptions for years to come" - "Someday I will write a book about it! Tasteless is evil, and evil is tasteless. Isn't it clear that simple and clean design will make the world a better place?"
    Then the snowball went out of fashion, but the habit of bottled water remained. Jesper takes a sip and stands up, then adjusts the knot of his tie in the V-neck of his sweater, picks up the phone and calls a cab.
    The concrete cube under the spruces goes out, and the car with Jesper inside dives into the darkness of the forest. Dense clouds of oil smoke remain behind her. In the empty house, surrounded by glass walls, the phone rings, a white machine on a cube-shaped wooden table with an exceptionally beautiful texture.
   
    Darkening.
    International Police Agent Teresh Maciek steps off the train onto the expansive platform of the magnet station. The steel monoliths of the cars gleam in the increasing rain. They rise above the platform, suspended to the sky by a web of cables. Steam rises from beneath the cars, from the red-hot magnets, and floats in clouds over the asphalt of the platform. Maciek takes the suitcase from the conductor and, together with the crowd, heads toward the station building.
    A coin falls into the slot of the pay phone. As the tone goes, the I.P.D. agent trains himself to say "hello" in a calm and relaxed voice. The freckles on his nose and cheeks have faded completely over time, and there are mournful creases at the corners of his mouth. No one answers; the agent pulls an address and route book from his briefcase and decides to take the streetcar.
    The dark hulk of the magnet station looms over the city. From its womb, luminous elevator cabins descend smoothly, like dandelion fluffs, into Vaasa. In one of them, Agent Macheek watches the only northern metropolis glow beneath his feet. Rain streams down the elevator glass, and beyond it, a squat, level city spreads out in a glittering archipelago in the North Sea. The slender tower of the Telefunken rises lonely above the gloomy green complex of buildings. Motorway interchanges loop and glow with gold; the traffic is smooth, as in a dream. Here is Königsmalm, the commercial center - and right below it is Salem: the colorful lights of the immigrant neighborhood scatter across the pavement. Horse-drawn streetcars ride out from under the canopy of the arena, rattling, climbing the slopes and disappearing under the brilliant green of the chestnut trees. The tracks wind their way among dozens and hundreds of Lovisa parks, leading to university campuses and social housing districts, where the city quietly gives way to coniferous forests. The lights go out in the distant low-rise suburbs, and Macheek imagines summer cottages, empty beaches, and pine trees napping in the rain. Beyond them begins the real Katla, with its blackening woodlands, glades, and valleys, where on the other side of the Winter Orbit, frost arrives in late September.
    Chestnut leaves fly into the waiting pavilion under the canopy of the arena, where a girl with a feline voice announces route numbers and departure times over a loudspeaker. Her voice echoes off the piers of the building; the leaves stick to the pavilion glass and the streetcar windows, their stale smell filling the air.
    An International Police agent climbs into a crowded carriage, holding a suitcase in his hand. On its lid, the contours of the isolreal zone form the silhouette of a bird of prey in flight - the emblem of the International Police Force.
   
    "Private Detective. - Han is lying. He is not a private detective. A private investigator is a chimera. Overweight and greasy hair are part of his own career in his parents' basement, where he collects a collection of disappearance-related items; the rest is taken from a more successful classmate, Teresh Macheek, who serves with the International Police, in the Missing Persons Unit. This fantastic hybrid has bailed Han out many times. But not today.
    "I'm sorry, did I not hear you?" - The woman in the pantsuit is distracted from the conversation.
    "I'm a private detective. More specifically, I look for missing people. After the police and law enforcement agencies give up, friends or relatives - more often relatives - come to me. And then... then I do what I can."
    Behind them, Sven von Fersen hands his former class teacher a collection of his witty articles on leadership. He looks like a real citizen of the world. It's hard to believe that he calls swarthy people with unusual names camel shit.
    "Yeah..." he turns to Han. - That's how you look for them. Until now."
    "Well, yes, that's what it was at first. I really did. But while I was doing it, I learned a lot... And... then it just worked itself out. - The man in the blue tie begins to sweat. He's running out of patience. - And anyway, listen to yourself! Half the people here are talking about it. Just try to tell me you don't care!"
    "First of all, no half the people here are discussing it. Maybe you'd like to think so, but it's not. And second - I care, of course, but I think it's pretty pathetic."
    "What's pathetic?"
    "This topic. And the people who are still mucking about with it. They write to the newspapers that they saw a woman who looked like Moline or Annie would look now, and stuff like that."
    "Fuck you!"
    The people around the hors d'oeuvres table fall silent and look in the direction of Han and von Fersen. The woman in the pantsuit becomes uncomfortable. She looks away. A sweaty man in thick-lensed glasses shoves a half-eaten pretzel down his cheek and heads for the checkroom.
   
    The chestnuts in front of the gymnasium sway in the wind. Leaves fall on the porch of the main entrance, on the sidewalks and in the puddles. The surface of the water ripples, the reflections of the lanterns break under the wheels of the car that drives up. The cab door slams, and a pair of white suede shoes for three thousand reals steps right into a puddle. The interior designer takes three long strides, cursing in a whisper. Waving his hand in annoyance at the muddy splashes, he slips a folder of papers under his arm and walks up the steps to the main entrance.
    Inside, it's warm and smells like glue. Jesper walks through the lobby; the parquet scratched with shoe shifts creaks beneath his feet. He takes a card with his name on it from a smiling volunteer and slips it into the back pocket of his pants.
    "Hang it on your chest so you can be recognized."
    "Yes, of course," Jesper says. And leaves the card in his pocket.
    Yearbook portraits and general class photos are on display. Eighth B. A skinny, blond boy with a head too big for his narrow shoulders and bangs slicked back behind his ear. To his left is the son of immigrants from Ilmaraa, chubby, wearing a nightmarish tie. Little Han looks through the camera with a hazy gaze. A long, freckled goyko from the "accelerated" back row advises him to take off his glasses. Without them, the view isn't as shabby.
    The man looks through row after row, and anxiety grows in his heart. His imagination overtakes his gaze. Somewhere in the middle of the row of girls shines a massive cluster of thermonuclear reactions, a distant nebula where worlds are born.
    Eight years ago, Jesper's spirited face first appeared on the glossy cover of a design magazine. True, the spotlight had to be shared with two other cocaine visionaries. Here's the three of them posing for a photo on their flagship couch. A softbox diffused the light, Fackenhuff played, and underneath the photo they then wrote "pioneers," "future," "style" and many other words he remembers very well. Two hours later, Jesper sat alone in his glowing cube over an intimidatingly sized pile of class photos and newspaper clippings, holding a hair band in his hand. One look at the spruce trees swaying in the wind and the temptation to check again to see if the smell had weathered out was defeated. The rubber band went in the household waste bin, and everything about the girls was sorted and put away in a file folder. Jesper stood in the middle of the room and exhaled with relief. That was enough. This was over.
    But where are they? Why aren't they here? Why aren't any of them here? Frustrated, Jesper, about to leave, takes a step back to the booth to look through all the pictures properly, but then, in the middle of the lobby, a thirty-four-year-old man suddenly stops. A guy who still lives with his mother.
   
    *****
   
    Early spring, twenty years ago.
    Little Inayat Khan falls into a frozen muddy puddle. His reindeer sweater is stained, dark red blood drips from his nose. Despite all the threats and anxious advice to stay on the ground, the boy gets up - slowly, slipping now and then. And here he stands face to face with Sven von Fersen, just a few meters away. The dirt is drying on Han's face, and his hands are raised in a clumsy boxing stance. His fists are shaking with anger and humiliation.
    "You know what he said?" - Von Fersen begins again.
    The little underling knows what Han said, but asks anyway: "What did he say, Sven?"
    "That he walked Moline home and kissed her," Sven answers eagerly. - No, you heard - Ham saw her off, Ham kissed her!"
    Everyone laughs, and the singer immediately picks up on it: "Well, why are you offended? It's your own fault! Those are your words, you shouldn't have said them if they were so offensive. And Moline, don't you think it's hurtful to listen to these gossips? А? What do you think?"
    Angry tears leave tracks on the cheeks of the boy in the deer sweater. Yesterday after school, Han let his imagination run wild. It was a terrible mistake. The sun comes out from behind a cloud, and he sees Moline Lund's blond hair shining like a halo a few dozen feet from the circle of spectators. Her face is red with shame. Charlotte, the eldest of the sisters, puts her arm around Moline's shoulders, and together they turn their backs in their light coats.
    "And anyway, why isn't your sweater with camels on it?"
    A scream cleaves the air like a scimitar. Khan lunges desperately at von Fersen. He slips slightly, but in his mind he clearly sees the sharp spear of Ramut Karzai, the hero of the Amistad epic, piercing the enemy's chest.
    The distance shortens; it seems that a fierce fight cannot be avoided. But suddenly an unaccountable factor appears at the edge of his narrowed from anger field of vision and grabs Khan, his other hand resting on von Fersen's bulging chest.
    Standing with his arms outstretched and a strand of blond hair falling over his face, Jesper spits out his gum and repeats conciliatorily several times: "Okay, Sven, pohui, forget it. Han tries to wriggle out of his desk mate's grip; a frayed cheek and a broken nose stain Jesper's shoulder.
    So they stand there. The bell rings, the big break ends, and Han and Jesper are alone in the courtyard. Jesper rubs the shoulder of his sweater with a napkin, "So did you make out with Moline, or not?"
    "No. But I walked her home. And it went well. Very well, even."
    "But still not that much."
    "Yes."
   
    *****
   
    "That shirt! Han, don't tell me it's the same shirt!"
    "Jesper!"
    Standing in the school checkroom, two adults shake hands for the first time in years. There is a glimmer of warmth in Jesper's faint smile. He begins, "The last time we saw each other, I think I was rude. I realize now that I was wrong.
    Han only laughs. His two-day stubble shakes along with his good-natured double chin.
    "I must have left a terrible impression," Jesper says, immediately moving on to his next point: "I have something for you. Something new. - He points to the folder and looks questioningly at Han:" "Or have you decided in the meantime to become, I don't know, a chef?"
    "Well, you know me - only hardcore."
    Without saying a word about meeting his classmates, Han picks up his jacket, and he and Jesper head for the exit.
    "Look, the vanishing commissioner!"
    "Not bad at all."
    "I made a Teresha like that, too. A special version. The picture is the same, but guess what happens if you turn it a little further?"
    "So?"
    "Ukhtomsky will also disappear! And one pigeon. The one half behind Ukhtomsky."
    "Otherwise, half a bluebird would be hanging in the air."
    "Right."
    Droplets fall from Agent Maciejek's umbrella; cigarette smoke rises under the dome and dissolves in the wind. Clutching an Astra in his teeth, Macheek folds the map and slips it into his briefcase. The schoolyard is in front of him; two men are running across the yard through a silver curtain of rain - straight for him. Goyko, in his gray herringbone coat, takes a step back, making room under his umbrella. His umbrella is huge. A special model for the International Police.
    "Well, did you apologize?"
    "Apologized," Han replies for Jesper.
    "And how is it - fun?" - Macheek nods toward the school.
    Han shakes his head, and Jesper explains:
    "Let's go into town. I know a place. A new one."
    Three men under one large umbrella emerge from the focus. The distant chime of the bells is getting closer, and the silver curtain hides the friends from view...
   
    *****
   
    Eight years before that.
    ...Until the magnetic reader clicks, lowered to the tape, the illuminated hands shake at twelve decibels. The beat is unbearably smooth, ultramodern - like cocaine. Or maybe not, it's hard to compare. The beat was recorded here in Vaasa, in one of its world-famous studios. It was written by the semi-mythical musician Fackenhaff, who was supposedly an immigrant from Oranje, a disc jockey and music producer, but might as well have been a group of people or a car in the sky. And the cocaine was brought in on a pirate cruiser across the uncharted Grayland. It was made by a slave dreaming of revolution with a machete in his hand and an overseer guarding the fields with a carbine. Fackenhuff made the beat to make the girls want to dance and the boys want to admire them. A slave with a machete made a snowball to keep La Puta Madre from shooting his whole family. For six months the snowball matured on the high plateau of Irmala, in the rays of the golden sun. And the sun was held in a turquoise sky by a world eagle with a thousand-kilometer wingspan. This is the place where the bit goes under the water for half a minute, and then - just unbelievable! - came back, even more powerfully than before, whispered Fackenhaff in the ear of the spirit of debauchery itself. It had white angel wings, but its breath on the temple of the disc-jockey leaning over the console was scalding hot and smelled of cinnamon and primal evil.
    God, it feels good to go numb in the nose. God, this place where the bit comes out of the water feels so good. It's so sad. And even cooler than before. Aren't I cool?! Look, I'm on the cover - how cool I am up there on that cover. I'm a vertical column of light and there's darkness all around me. And that's it, nothing else, you know?
    On Jesper's white cubic sofa, at the multifunctional modular table, the guests exchange impressions of the world's exhibition. Champagne glasses of socialism are clinking. Jesper dances alone like an outlandish albino rooster. From the water bottle in his right hand pearl drops fly to the windows.
   
    *****
   
    The streets of Vaasa float by outside the cab window like a bygone past. A huge black-horned horse snorts, steam coming from its nostrils. Something sweet sprouts in the wounded heart of an International Police agent. The rain subsides, and the young men close their umbrellas one by one in the dark. Familiar names on the subway entrances. A girl on a bicycle turns into an alley, where the yellow electric signs make steam. A stream of cars is reflected in the windows of houses and closed stores until the freeway rises above the footpaths. The city glimpses through gaps in the stone fence, and a little boy in the window of a passing carriage waves to Maciek.
    On the Königsmaalms Bridge, the passing lights turn into a dotted line. Above the water rise the gray outlines of an upscale residential neighborhood; that's where Teresch's house was when he lived in Vaasa as a child. Ahead, beyond the windshield of the motocaret, begins the island part of town, which twenty years ago was considered disadvantaged. Now, as Jesper explains, thoughtful development and several innovative galleries have turned Estermalm into a "trendy neighborhood.
    "You mean bohemian-bourgeois?"
    The taxi meter ticks, and it's warm and dark in the cabin. Jesper skips Teresh's joke.
    "Come on, tell me what's going on." - Han abruptly interrupts the conversation about the development of the city and the reunion of the class.
    "I need a projector. It's a film, I'll tell you all about it at the Movies.
    "Then show me the rubber band."
    "Yes, Jesper, don't be bored, show me the rubber band, show me the rubber band," Teresh joins in the entreaty.
    "Please don't start that again. I don't carry it with me, and I threw it away altogether. I've had a very strange period in my life..."
    A sly smile appears on Khan's face:
    "Come on, Jesper, don't be stingy."
    "Yeah, don't be greedy, share with your classmates."
    Jesper turns away to the window:
    "No."
    A minute passes in silence. The rustle of wheels on the road, the click of a turn signal. Han and Teresh grin at each other while Jesper looks out the window with feigned indifference. Only after a while does he condescend to continue the conversation.
    "So what did you tell Fersen? That you're a detective?"
    "Gum, Jesper, gum! Show me!"
    The designer dutifully slips her hand into the pocket of the Perseus Black coat and pulls out a ring case.
   
    *****
    It used to be so good, and now it's so sad. When she and a young photographer, the wife of a housing planner, stood at the window and talked about funk! -aesthetics and futurism, it seemed that it would only be like that now, and it would never be like that again. But right now a thin voice from the monolithic speakers was repeating for the ten thousandth time: "I love... I love... I love..." The damp, cold morning fog lies on the ferns outside the window. It's not that at all anymore. It's not about Jesper anymore. Just some singer in some studio out there. Probably need to catch up. He just got high, but it didn't get any better. Maybe he needs more.
    A minute later, the twenty-six-year-old, fresh off a major-league version of Jesper de la Gardie is standing in the middle of the room in a milky gray light. Her coffee-colored shirt is unbuttoned, her nostrils are red, and her lips are angrily pursed.
    "Okay. The party's over. Go home."
    No one can hear him, Fackenhuff is playing too loud. Suddenly there is silence; a vertical column of light stands next to the Stereo-8 tape recorder and presses the STOP button with his finger. Heads turn.
    "The party's over. Get out, you bastards."
    As they gather embarrassedly, searching for clothes and bags, Jesper watches them with glassy eyes, his mouth grotesquely curved in a contemptuous grimace. When a fellow coke-addict pats him on the shoulder, Jesper throws him a look full of such bottomless hatred that their relationship is ruined forever.
    The photographer, the wife of a housing planner, falls a little behind the company and returns under the concrete roof of the cube. "Anklet left!" - she lies.
    Her long legs in sandals, with a silver chain around her ankle, frame the following bleak picture. Jesper sits in a corner of the kitchen among the tattered trash bags. Surrounded by apple nibbles, water bottles, and hand-molded paper bags, he stares into the kindly face of the planner's wife. There is a September mist and sea spray in his eyes; he wants nothing from her. Sympathy? Thanks, I'll make do. The reeds murmur in the wind, the silhouettes of beach cabins line up under the pale sky. Four girls run across the sand and disappear into thin air.
    In his right hand, the designer clutched a delicate pink hair ring.
   
    *****
   
    Han looks up at Jesper, still holding the ring case near his nose. His eyebrows furrow anxiously. The car stops - abruptly, with a jerk. The cab driver looks back at the passengers, but immediately turns away when he sees the expressions on their faces.
    "The smell is gone," Khan says.
    "I know."
    "It's all very strange."
    "I know."

▲
3. ANNUELS
⬍
    3. ANNOUNCEMENTS
    The Romanski Conference distinguishes ten types of missing persons. The ninth of them, "annulants," is completely contrary to the International Declaration of Human Rights. Annulment is when state security agencies eliminate not only a person, but also all documentary evidence of his existence. It is a particular kind of political elimination - the curse of oblivion, imposed on a number of historical figures with varying degrees of success. In the case of the state of Mesch, for example, one can statistically establish the loss of as much as ten percent of all cultural and historical heritage.
    We will not dwell on successful examples: it is impossible to discuss something that never existed. But we all leave traces, and the censors are human too. Thus, the annulled citizen - precisely because of attempts to destroy all memory of him - can become a far more recognizable historical figure than someone who was simply shot in the head behind a garbage dump. What other outstanding narrative could have saved the Samara party thug Yulia Kuznitsky from oblivion, if not that funny photo?
    With the development of recording equipment, more complex technological processes were added to the custom of stripping the image of the former emperor from coins. The well-oiled bureaucratic machine of the deformed workers' state would have little trouble refreshing its punch cards. But in the case of photographic and, in some particularly curious cases, cinematic material, the purification begins to require certain technical tricks. This is perfectly illustrated by the example of the aforementioned "disappearing commissar" Julius Kuznitsky, who was forced by the retoucher's magic wand to evaporate from aboard the steamer "Mazov" on a frowning Sunday morning.
    Julius was a bastard, an illiterate chump. His young eyes had not seen the world revolution - the Commissar's star rose later, in Samara. Not having the slightest idea about Mazov's ideas, however, he did not hesitate to label his victims with denunciatory political labels. This is what ruined him. It seems that Presidium Chairman Knezhinsky finally got tired of putting up with this disgrace. "Tell me, Kuznya, how can Comrade Zdorov be a counter-revolutionary if the revolution was fifty years ago? And why is it that Comrade Bronsky's masovist-Knezhinsky beliefs are "hopelessly narrow-minded"? "Knezhinsky is my last name, I am Sapurmat Knezhinsky!"
    The two versions of the photograph, the original and the retouched ones, placed side by side, became a popular cultural phenomenon in certain circles. What adds spiritual value to this curiosity is the nasty ratty grin Kuznitsky displayed on his face at the time. Look at him! Who wouldn't want to erase that nasty ferret from the pages of history?
    Much sadder is the story of the third character in this fateful photo. This is Aram Ukhtomsky, Mazov's loyal revolutionary comrade in the Eleventh Day Government, an outstanding agronomist, geneticist, and one of the three breeders of the potato variety Ulan Yellow. A rare apolitical figure whose unassuming and invaluable contributions to the diet of the world proletariat saved him three times from party purges. Until Ukhtomsky's scientific impartiality at the XXI plenum of geneticists seemed offensive to someone. Modern genetics turned out to be incompatible with Knezhinsky's tabula rasa philosophy, according to which with the proper revolutionary spirit one can grow figs from gooseberry seeds.
    During his penitential address to the Presidium, Ukhtomsky realized with horror that he was calling himself a pathetic plasticine worm. The poor scientist had never delivered a self-criticism speech, and so overdid it that even in that era of revealing self-incrimination, the impression of his speech was too heavy to bear. After that memorable speech, Ukhtomsky was called nothing less than a sycophant. He had completely compromised himself as a historical figure, and the merciful chairman Knezhinsky decided to spare the memory of his older and once far more worthy comrade. Having sent Ukhtomsky behind the garbage dump after the Proceedings of the Nine, he ordered that all records of his existence be destroyed. But the story could not be faked: the retouchers had absent-mindedly missed one photograph in which, among others, Ukhtomsky was depicted. The same one with which Commissioner Kuznitsky had gone into oblivion before.
    But most technically impressive is the story of the decanonization of Ignus Nielsen, a former schoolteacher, the Apostle of Masov. As important a figure as he was in the history of the Communist movement, the censors of Vaasa turned him into a disembodied ghost. At some point the image of Mazov's apocalyptic bloodsucker became too onerous for the image of the social-democratic North. And then, together with Graad, who fought back against the revolution, they made Nielsen disappear. To the confusion of the censors, in the technically advanced days of the Eleventh-day government, dozens of hours of film footage were shot with Mazow, where the revolutionary icon was almost always accompanied by Nielsen, his best friend and comrade-in-arms. Destroying all the film footage would have been too suspicious. Thus came the ghostly gray cytoplasm constantly floating to the right of Mazov. It took historians decades to unravel this eerie mystery.
    Even today, many believe that this cytoplasm is communism.

▲
4. VIDCUN HIRD
⬍
    4. VIDCUN HIRD
    The twelve-millimeter film buzzes in the projector. Opposite the screen, Han sits on the couch next to Maciejk, looking incredulously at the square cup of coffee on the square saucer. He takes a spoon to stir the sugar and cautiously brings it to the cup.
    Everything in the Cinema Café is either glass or white. The chair where Jesper sits behind the projector is white, the walls of the soundproof booth are glass. The glass screen covered with a white cloth, the white sofa where Han and Macheek feel out of place. In the middle of the cafe stands a stuffed albino tiger in a glass display case. Don't break anything - it will cost you dearly.
    "Let me guess," the agent rolls his Astra between his fingers, kneading it to just the right softness, "Your design?"
    "One of my students. This place is like a movie: a white screen, and they project us onto it, you know? What do you think? It's like being in a movie, you know?"
    "Yeah. Not too cozy," Han replies.
    "Yes, perhaps a little unnerving, but the boy is talented. He needed to do a project like this, with high visibility. And this is the only place where you can get a projector quickly. So please try to be more open," Jesper and the tiger look in Khan's direction. The tiger's glass eyes are an even lighter blue than the designer's.
    "Hey, I'm open enough as it is!"
    Maciek takes a notebook and a pencil out of his jacket pocket.
    "So," Jesper begins, "a relative of one of my colleagues works as a cameraman. He shoots documentaries. Last fall he told me about his new project. With Gessle. Conrad Gessle - have you heard of him?"
    "He films mostly about crime, doesn't he?"
    "Not only that. Yösta - that's the name of the cameraman - said he was afraid, and he asked me if it was even worth taking it on. He's got kids too, and so on. The point is that this film - that's where I got interested - is about Vidkun Hird."
    "Oh my God!"
    "Not Vidkun Heard!"
    "Wait a minute! Yeah, I know, we've been over this, he was in Arda at the time, there's no way he could have been in Vaasa, and all that. But I decided to follow up on it anyway, you know? So two weeks ago, Yosta came to talk to me. Said they were on the verge of a breakthrough. They'd been sitting with Hird in Kronstadt for six months..."
    "Come on!"
    "... That was their strategy: to gain his trust. He liked Hessle: a northerner, white as snow, well-read, an interesting opponent. Well, here goes. Heard wants to impress the journalist, so he ruffles a few feathers. Bragging. Gessle acts as if no one had ever seen such maniacs with a violent imagination, and Vidkun Heard is one of a kind.
    "Yes, yes..."
    "For the first three months Widkun only hints, piques interest, throws suspicious dates around, talks about trips to the beach. Hessle pretends not to pay attention, discusses philosophy with Vidkun, going beyond good and evil - I have it all written down here," Jesper slams his folder on the glass cube of the table, "and eventually Hird breaks through.
    Jesper flicks a switch, and a small light bulb lights up in the heart of the projector.
    "I must warn you. - He casts a glance in Khan's direction. - Those of us whose profession doesn't involve ditches and missing children may take some of Vidkun's words very personally."
    Teresch, who was putting a sixth spoonful of sugar in his black coffee, sets the cup aside. After a noticeable pause, he takes a pencil as sharp as a needle, slips it into a sharpener, and twists it, smiling bitterly.
    "Buddy, when are you going to figure it out? Ditches and missing children are your topic, too.
    "Okay," Jesper sighed. - Ditches and missing children. That's my theme, too. Han?"
    "Ditches and missing children?" - Teresh lifts his cup of coffee, draught with sugar, into the air with sudden enthusiasm and waits.
    "Skål!" - Han exclaims.
    "Skål," Jesper maintains and sips a slice of lime from the glass along with the water. He chews the slice, wrinkling his nose at the sour taste.
    "Jesper, and the tape?"
    "Ah, yes..."
   
    On a white canvas appears a superhuman, a rapist, a molester of minors, a former member of the fascist Hjelmdall NFD party, Vidkun Hird. One hand is handcuffed to a chair, with the other he is pictorially propping up his cheek: the philosopher of the future knows that he is being filmed. With this in mind, he raises his chin with Nordic bulldog-like brows at a certain noble angle, and so peers down from above with his deep-set eyes. His hair is neatly slicked back in the fashion of thirty years ago; he sits with his leg over his head. One can definitely tell that Widkun is a vain man. He refused to go down in history in a color-marked prison jumpsuit, and talks to Conrad Gessle while wearing a blackshirt uniform. And that was just one of his many conditions.
    "Other people are not born until after death," he pronounces in Old Ardish dialect. The outdated words add to the rustic charm of a conversation about the subtle issues of the day. A six-digit clock on the table indicates that it is the third hour of the August 12 interview.
    "Vidkun, did you know that I have a master's thesis in Old Ardish? I can send you literature on the subject.
    "Oh, that would be very kind, Conrad. You know how I feel about the selection of books at the local library." - Both laugh understandingly.
    "Arda is the original language of our tribe," Vidkun continues in an emphatic tone. - It was spoken by the mammoth hunters who inhabited the plains of Katla thousands of years ago. Arda has distinct advantages in expressing the cornerstone concepts of wisdom: advantages that mainland languages do not have. Arda is our nature, the current Vaasian is a portly bastard. A mainland degenerate, stinking of Grad. This distorted language is incapable of expressing truth. All the sentences in this unclean mush ultimately denote only one thing: a mixture of peoples. In the coming century our race will return to its original adverb. And then there will be a new age for wisdom!"
    "You've talked about it a lot. I have also read your notes on the subject. It's all very interesting, but don't you think your established image sabotages the more subtle aspects of your teaching?"
    "What?" - Heard's eyes flare. The deep creases in his cheeks grow longer, and his lips are contemptuously protruding.
    Conrad pretends not to notice his indignation and continues:
    "I can see the logic in your reasoning. But don't you think people would have a hard time believing them scientifically, given that they belong to a convicted rapist?"
    "For our people, coitus is something quite different from what we are fed under the guise of romance by modern social-pornographic propaganda. You know this, Conrad. One day, when the useless morality of mainland peoples leads them to extinction, you'll know what I'm talking about."
    "Let's imagine for a moment the average citizen..."
    "The average citizen sends his daughter to the same school as the goyko's and the kiptas, to this racial dump, from childhood. The average citizen gives up his child to be mocked by these ruberoids. It is understandable what can happen when four girls end up in such a school.
    Conrad notices the words on the philosopher's lips, but does not show it.
    "The average citizen is your potential reader. The average citizen chooses whether your vision works or not. You talk about the national question! Do you think no one will be suspicious? The author is a fascist..."
    "The Nationalist.
    "...a fascist and serial rapist sentenced to life imprisonment at Kronstadt for at least four murders, and his book is a mixture of historiosophy, eugenics and justification of rape!"
    "It's all history. History, Conrad. You're a smart man, but the homosexual education system has corrupted you. You think history is decided by master's theses, and, I don't know..."
    "And what do you think tops it? - The interviewer doesn't back down. - Rape?"
    Widkun pulls a page out of Hessle's notebook, right in front of him. A guard in a dark blue uniform bursts into the frame and hits the tribesman on the wrist with his truncheon. Heard cries out in pain, and the sheet flies into the air. The three-time Oscar Zorn nominee and world-renowned documentary filmmaker gestures to stop the guard. He lowers his truncheon, but remains on guard beside the rubbing prisoner's wrist.
    "The pen," Widkun throws an angry glance in Gessle's direction.
    Clutching the writing instrument in his fist, the prisoner looks triumphantly at the guard, "Hey, you! Give me my piece of paper."
    The baton rises menacingly in the air, but then Hessle rips out a new sheet and places it on the steel table in front of Hird.
    "Now do you see? The crossing." - Vidkun's carefully combed hair is disheveled in the fray, a lone strand of blond hair dangling before his eyes. Pressing the sheet to the table with his wrist to keep it from sliding, Heard tries to settle the pen on it; in his hand it looks sharp and dangerous. Finally he loses patience: "Please release my other hand. I can't do this."
    In response to Hessle's pleading gaze, the guard removes a bunch of keys from his belt. Now Heard speaks directly to the spectator:
    "Thousands of years ago our ancestors came here, to the lands at the edge of the world. They came by dog sled across the vast Grayness. Only the staunchest retained their sanity during this glorious crossing. They disposed of the weaker-spirited mainlanders by leaving them to Greyness. Our stern ancestors separated from the herd without question those who had lost their minds. And in the end only the children of Hokon and Gudrun with pure, unshakable soul and unbending will stepped on the land of Katla. In half a century our forefathers wiped out all the mammoths in Katla. They thrived." - Vidkun Hird triumphantly circled the space with his freed hand and began to draw tiny dots on the sheet.
    "It is an elementary law of eugenics, Conrad, elementary. The more unfavorable the external conditions, the more they force the human individual to develop. This snowy, dark expanse... Man is not meant to live here. Already in order to simply survive here, one must possess the traits of a superhuman.
    Gessle listens to him attentively, leaning forward expectantly and nodding interestedly.
    "The superhuman essence cannot be confined within the framework of morality. The superhuman is the wisdom of the flesh. There are no inhibitions to it, everything is permitted to it. Through blood, in the darkness of night, from one winter to another, it is passed on between generations. You, too, have the traits of the superhuman, Conrad.
    Conrad nods. Vidkun Heard's face turns unhealthily red. It's something between a feverish blush and an allergic rash.
    "All of us, including you, have a responsibility to strengthen this primal beginning within us. Just as a predator strengthens his jaws as he chews meat. Responsibility... You have a responsibility to your descendants. So that they too will have big, strong jaws with which to bite off a lot of meat.
    Vidkun shuts up and admires his creation with a proud smile that doesn't suit his face at all. The camera cannot yet see what is in the drawing, but Gessle rises from his chair to look at the sheet.
    "Amazing Creature. Medium. A rare treasure."
    With the projector whirring, Jesper takes a plastic-wrapped copy of the drawing out of a folder and places it on the table. On the paper is neatly drawn something like an alien constellation, an elegant constellation of dozens of dots.
    Khan opens his mouth in horror. International Police Agent Teresh Maciek makes a note in his notebook with icy calm.
    "You have no idea, Conrad, how I fucked her. You have no idea..." says Vidkun Heard before Jesper hastily turns off the projector.
   
    *****
   
    June, twenty years ago.
    The pine grove on the hill near the beach is semi-dark and cool. The sun is blazing over the tops of the pines, but only sparse patches of light reach the sand beneath them, pierced by a maze of roots, like the golden bottom of the ocean. For a moment there is complete silence beneath the trees. You can hear the sound of heather crunching under the shoes of the approaching boys a hundred yards away, before the sea breeze begins to rustle the canopy of pine needles again. The tree trunks sway slightly, a maze of dark orange columns with golden streaks of sunshine. The sweet smell of resin floats beneath the branches. The dusty scent of chamomile, bitter and tart, fills Teresh's nostrils.
    A match flares up, and a puff of the Astra stolen from my father sweeps away all odors; a stream of smoke looms clearly in the lone ray of sunlight. Teresh is lying there, tucking his windbreaker under his head. Lying in a patch of sunshine, he trains himself to let the rings fly. Just a few kilometers away, in the nearest village, is his father's diplomatic cottage. Three weeks ago, at the beginning of summer vacation, this house, conveniently located near the beach, suddenly made Teresh a popular boy.
    When the others' footsteps can already be clearly heard from over the hill, Teresh blows a small ring of smoke through the sprawling large ring.
    "Oh! I got it..." - he shouts, thus destroying his masterpiece.
    "What?" asks Jesper, dressed in shorts and a sailor's shirt, climbing to the top. - What did you get?"
    "Let one ring through the other."
    "Are you smoking?!" - horrified Jesper.
    "Do you want one? "Astra." The strongest."
    "Give me one, Teresh," Khan shouts, climbing the hill after Jesper. Binoculars hang from a leather strap around Khan's neck.
    "Here," Teresh tosses the wad to Han, who fidgetily tries to catch it. The boy sticks his tongue out with exertion, but manages not to drop the tutu, and brings it close to his glasses.
    "Awesome," Han gives a professional assessment of the box. It has white stars running across a sky-blue background.
    "Stupid habit," Jesper tosses, and, turning away, begins to study the vegetation on a nearby knoll.
    "It's your shirt that's stupid," Teresh lazily props himself up on his elbows and offers Han a light from a match.
    Squinting and placing his palm visor over his forehead, Jesper looks at the forest floor with a busy look.
    "Stupid, huh? Annie doesn't think so. If anything, she even complimented me. On the last day."
    "Really?"
    Jesper turns to Han. He smokes ineptly.
    "Hey, Han, remember that time in the closet when Annie said I had a nice shirt?"
    "Well, yeah. Teresh, she really said that."
    "And Fersen got in like a fool, and answered Annie for me, that she had a beautiful dress. And something about her hair. That was hilarious."
    "You have to be polite every chance you get," Han says with a smile, coughing slightly from the smoke.
    "Let's go."
    The three boys head toward the shore in slithering patches of light under the trees. Han clumsily flicks out his cigarette and begins twirling his binoculars on the strap. His backpack bounces behind his shoulders as he quickens his stride as he descends. Running down the slopes, the boys skip over heather bushes; only Jesper fears for his white pants and strides steadily with his hands in his pockets like a family outing. As they approach their shelter on the bluff, the noise of the trees gives way to the sound of the ocean.
    On the log fence is a "landslide hazard" sign: a little man falls down a steep slope. After crossing the walkway and diving into the bushes just below the sign, Han explains to Teresh: "The North Sea, though called the sea, is actually an ocean: theoretically, in Grey, it passes into the Sea of Igress. Which, in turn, washes the shores of Graad. Thus, the North Sea is interisolar. That is, in essence, an ocean. It is a matter of classification."
    All three of them are in their third week of trying to talk to each other as academically as possible. They want to give the impression of being businessmen when they return to school in the fall. Jesper, cautiously making his way through the bushes behind them, continues in the same vein: "There were no words for ocean in the languages of Katla, so everything here is called sea.
    A huge greenish-blue body of water opens up in front of the kids from a high cliff. Clouds melt in the pale blue sky, the sun is reflected in the water by a bright white streak. The ocean waves wash lazily and majestically over the long stretch of sand. Charlottesville. The wind dies down for a moment, and a rush of hot air hits my face. Insects buzz over the flowering briar trees. The beach curves toward the sea in a long arc, all the way to the Havsenglar Hotel at the tip of the peninsula. Tiny figures of people under red and white striped umbrellas can be seen on the sand.
    The boys sit down on the lawn among the briar bushes, behind which there is a high sandy cliff. Teresh repeatedly speculated on how to jump off this soft cliff: fly there three meters, and then land on a sandy slope already gentle enough to slide down it on your heels. At such moments Jesper was beginning to worry about his clothes, and Han was simply frightened.
    So now Teresh sits closest to the edge; Jesper, meanwhile, takes his binoculars away from Han. The sun is reflected in the convex insect eyes of the instrument. The image of the people on the beach below, summer northerners with their towels and umbrellas, is enhanced in the dark, cool glass core. So it becomes discernible to Han with his glasses at +7 on the left and +4 on the right. Han bought the binoculars with his own money. In Vaasa, in a store for hunters. When Jesper gets tired of holding the binoculars, looking around the beach, it's Teresh's turn. With traces of rubber eyepieces around his eyes and freckles darkened from long squinting, he is forced to state, "Early, it's only ten. Not here yet."
    While Han and Teresh are discussing cigarettes-the tobacco in Vaasa is weak, the Graads are stronger; Han nods enthusiastically and praises every brand in a row-Jesper, like a sniper, aims binoculars at the beach. He won't miss this time.
    The crosshairs stop at the white sun umbrella, but don't find the red flowers they're looking for on it. Vertical lines crawl over young families, crumbling sandcastles and sunbeds with the outstretched bodies of sunbathers, stop at two blond girls, and then glide on-not them. Looks like he's gone too far.
    Jesper moves his focus closer. Somewhere at the two hundred meter mark, he gets a familiar vague premonition in his heart - the glow of a distant constellation, of an unknown galaxy. He waves to his friends, signaling them: something is happening. Han and Teresh look down at the beach, hand shielding their eyes from the sun.
    Jesper adjusts the focus of the Zeile lenses, and the pale pink mist before his eyes turns to her belly. His breath flips the lens from the girl's navel to her solar plexus, where the curved line of ribs rises to the ring binding the top of her leotard. The white ribbons on her shoulders are taut, the bumps of her breasts rising in time with her breathing. The wheel between the observation tubes clicks twice, and in the widened field of view the girl turns from back to stomach on the beige bedspread. The ashy hair and familiar round cheeks under the sunglasses flicker. Annie-Elyn Lund rises on her elbows and stares into a girl's magazine. Above her little ass begins a bizarre constellation of birthmarks stretching from her sacrum to her shoulder blades.
   
    *****
   
    An icy terror oozes outward through the seals of the glass stall. The three inside try to maintain the surface tension of their sanity, which they have barely maintained for twenty years.
    Han shrugs his shoulders:
    "Who knows that? Who? All this time I haven't read a word about it. It doesn't say it anywhere!"
    Teresh puts the pencil on the table.
    "Such things are called checklists. They are deliberately excluded from the list of admissions. Even in official documents. I have three folders like that in my head, and not a line on paper. And he knows it. Look at that!"
    Jesper's face remains calm. For him, it's all a thing of the past.
    "That's why this Yosta came to me. The officials only shrugged their shoulders. And he heard from someone at work that I knew the girls. They were all at a complete loss there. They never got any explanation from Heard. Yeah, by the way, I don't believe that story. Though Heard had some boys there in principle, he was more interested in Gudrun's plump-chested daughters.
    "It's definitely not him, the timing doesn't add up! - Han shouts. - Five hours before, he was six hundred kilometers away, buying a crankshaft and seals for his damn rape machine... some kind of couplings or I don't know what." - Because of the noise made by the infamous rape machine, Vidkun Heard's neighbors once called the police, and that was the beginning of the end for him.
    Still, Khan turns to the International Police Agent and looks him in the eyes with a questioning look:
    "Teresh. You have to open this folder. Keep investigating. He found out about it from somewhere, and it's the only lead we have besides those letters. You have to do it."
    "You have no idea how bad it is. This is the worst time to dig up old cases. There is no more support from Mundi, everything is on the brink of war. We don't know, for example, if Oranienrijk still exists. I'll be fired if I get into this again..."
    "No, Teresh, it can't be that nothing can be done at all! - Jesper gets angry; the threat of a world war doesn't bother him too much. - That's what you do, that's your job. So do it!"
    "Quiet, wait! Of course I'll take it. I figured it out when you invited me to your class reunion. You don't really think I thought you were overcome with nostalgia, do you? I open that folder all the time anyway, you know, it never closes. Let's hope the local police don't get in our way. Of course, they can't stand internationals. But few people bother to check our documents for questioning.
    Han smiles slyly.
    "Interrogation papers? So you're going there, to Kronstadt after all?"
    "Tomorrow."
    "It's good to know you're still cool, Teresh."
    Jesper smiles, too, now embarrassed by his flushed cheeks and ordered tone.
    "But he's under strict guard! There's nothing wrong with that.
    Teresh agrees.
    "And that's good. Twenty years. There's usually no hope after that long.
    "So there's hope?" - Jesper tilts his head understandingly, still too big for his shoulders.
    "Yes. You did well, Jesper. Good job."
    "The bill!" - The interior designer, who has been retired for two years, calls out to the waiter, snapping his fingers and pointing to the table. In the evenings, it's his worst. But tonight is different. This evening Jesper can afford some candy. Stupid little candies. Outside the cube windows night falls, and in its darkness everything becomes possible. Even that somewhere in the secret recesses of this world, under the eternal ice of Lake Vostok, or in the Erg desert where Ramut Karzai disappeared without a trace, or deep in the Lungs of the Grail - somewhere out there they can still be found. As they were then - as children. And so to become a child again. Beyond the clouds at the foot of the Mundi Hull, to pull back the curtain of tiny drops of water and reach them... It is good that you have not given up. Little by little everyone else forgot about us, the cold stars lit up in the night sky, the dark blue firmament swirling over our heads, but we knew that you were still looking for us.

▲
5. ZA/UM
⬍
    5. ZA/UM
    Anni-Elyn Lund removes her sunglasses and is dazzled by a fleeting flash of light. Her irises flicker green and yellow and blue, the smoky shadows on her eyelids shimmering in the light. Annie quickly twirls her head back and forth like a kitten. A sunbunny bunny jumps from her maiden magazine to the sand, from the sand to the umbrella, and the girl chases it with her eyes.
    "What are they doing?" - asks Teresh, sitting on the edge of the cliff and dangling his feet.
    "I don't get it, Moline's there too. Standing..."
    "That's how I see it standing, too," Khan interrupts impatiently.
    "Standing, and I have to admit, she looks pretty good in that red polka dot swimsuit. Separate, as usual, and-oh! She's got more-oh, shit!"
    Moline's half-smile in the binoculars turns into a smirk, flashing with predatory teeth. She raises the hand she used to shield her eyes from the sun and waves it defiantly over her head. The picture fades as Jesper hides the treacherous lenses under her stomach.
    "Get down, everybody get down!"
    Han hears the sound of his own blood in his ears, feels the pulse beating hard somewhere under his arm, and the thorns of briar sticking into his skin. Teresh, who is just leaning back, looks up into the pale June sky. A lone white-tailed eagle soars in the updraft above. The bird seems to be just hanging in the air.
    "Han, look, an eagle!"
    "What another eagle - ouch!" - The thorns mercilessly remind Han of himself.
    "Hold still, the bushes are shaking," hissed Jesper from the middle, lying belly-up on the binoculars.
    "Who cares if they're shaking or not, they've spotted us anyway. Look at what they're doing!"
    "See for yourself." - Jesper hands Han the binoculars.
    The bush shakes again as Han, in his short-sleeved shirt, climbs out of there. The boy gets up on his elbows and cautiously crawls to the edge with binoculars in his hand. Taking cover behind a clump of grass to remain unseen, Han brings the binoculars up to his eyes. He points hastily at the colorful white umbrella and moves his gaze to the blanket lying on the sand. There, to his surprise, sits only little Mai, looking somewhere in front of her.
    Han's glasses are fogging up. He anticipates the worst, and moves his binoculars closer and closer to the foot of the cliff, until a small pair of theatrical binoculars peer directly into his lenses some hundred meters away. It is Charlotte, the eldest of the sisters: she stands with her other hand on her hip. Her shoulder-length brown hair flutters in the wind. This beautiful and terrifying ninth-grade creature is as beyond Khan's immigrant reach as a seat in Parliament. And now she is so close that even as she passes the binoculars to Moline, her gaze rests directly on Han's poor eyes. Eyes that he now covers rather than enhances with his binoculars.
    "It's all gone, they have binoculars too," Han announces in an emergency meeting.
    "So that's why they were pointing to each other on that cliff yesterday - I know, I should have told you right away..."
    "What the hell, Teresh? - Yesper is angry. - It turns out they knew, and now you've got us all caught!"
    "Well, I forgot, I'm sorry. I thought maybe they were looking at that eagle. He's got a nest right here on the cliff..."
    "Shove that eagle up your ass."
    Han, of course, immediately bursts out laughing, and Jesper continues:
    "That's it, now all we have to do is stand up and wave back at them. I don't know what to tell them about the binoculars. I don't know at all."
    "Here's an idea," Teresh fearlessly stands up, and Han grabs his pants in horror. But soon the three thin-legged girls giggling on the beach below see a skinny blond boy awkwardly climb up beside Teresh, followed by a chubby Ilmaraan.
    "Hey, girls!" - shouts Teresh. Moline gasps with her hand over her mouth as the lanky, soldier-like figure leaps off a cliff four stories high.
   
    *****
   
    The next morning, twenty years later.
    The skin around the man's eyes is riddled with wrinkles of fatigue. At the temples, they go down, skirting his cheekbones. Under his eyes, at the bridge of his nose, they converge at sharp angles, making him look like a bird of prey. The furrows in his cheeks, wait, worry. His indeterminate color eyes have long ago become impenetrable, like the steel curtains of the offices of the International Police; no one can look behind these curtains to see what is going on inside. The agent has a protruding chin, now smoothly shaved, and a long gray neck; his smoking-damaged skin looks earthy against the white of his shirt. A narrow black tie dangled from under his collar. The rain had stopped by morning, but it's still cold and windy. He holds his coat collar up with his left hand and has a cigarette in his right.
    "What's up there in Kronstadt?" - asks a young officer from Vaasa, standing next to Teresh on the bow of a tiny patrol boat with a steaming cup of coffee in his hand.
    "Unfortunately, I can't answer that question," Teresh says mechanically, keeping his eyes on the autumn morning horizon. A flock of seagulls takes off from the reeds and begins to circle over the cold water with shrieks as the boat's engine starts up with a roar. Fuel oil smoke and a chemical rainbow on the tin-like gray water.
    "Coffee?" - the young man tries to resume the conversation.
    "Thank you, don't."
    Teresh feels the splash of water on his face. It's invigorating. In the low, gray sky, the sun is not yet visible: only dots of airships circle over the city, and at the very horizon, like a ghost, hangs the huge steel silhouette of a Graadian cruiser. Järnspöken, the iron ghosts, so they are called. They don't like these sinister ships here. Uninvited ghosts. Forever on guard, but from whom? Who has declared war on whom? None. Graad with his steel umbrella will not win love here, but also Teresh, who in the eyes of an ordinary northerner looks, talks and smokes like a Graad, will not go far on tales of Zemsko-batiushka, a hundred-year occupation and Yugraad massacres. Yes ... and even about Frantisek the Brave.
    Of course, he wanted to be like Frantisek the Brave. He still does. Every goyko wants to be like Frantisek. To take up positions, to rebel, to raise again the banners of the time of Zygismunt the Great. The prowess, the zeal, the lust for life - like the bells of a rushing troika!
    Where are they now?
    A lone patrol boat draws a long swath across the North Sea. The boat shakes mercilessly on the waves, and soon Teresh has to give up his cigarette to avoid going overboard. He goes to his cabin and sits hunched over on a bench: if he can't smoke, there's no point in staying outside. Besides, he tries not to look on the other side of town, further along the winding shoreline to where Charlotteyal is. God, but how it wants to! He once came here from Graad, four thousand kilometers away, by magnet train through Graystone, but he didn't call Han or Jesper, but went to Charlotteville and wandered there like an idiot. And then drove back. Another week in Grey. He and Jesper were still at odds after that story about the restaurant, and he didn't see the point in just hanging out with Han. This was how he had celebrated the Winter Solstice two years ago. It was his vacation. His staff psychiatrist had forbidden him to go out for a whole year. It was dangerous to spend that much time in Grey.
    Holding the tourniquet in his teeth, Maciek drives the needle of a glass-metal syringe into a well-defined vein on his wrist.
    And yet I want to see the reeds bowing in the wind again. It's so good to watch the waves calmly and peacefully wash over the beach. Somewhere in the colorless distance you can see the silhouette of a cliff. And water, cold water. Raindrops. So beautiful.
    Teresh's beefy hands gently stroke the black suitcase in his lap.
   
    *****
   
    "Haadramutkarsai!" shouts Inayat Khan from the edge of the cliff, and leaps down. The sun is shining. It tickles under his spine as if a hundred meters are still ahead, but the fall lasts only a moment. The sand suddenly rushes beneath his feet. For a few more seconds, Han hops over it on his heels, trying to slow down. A root digs into his ass and rocks scratch his back - his shirt is out of his pants and up. His glasses fly off his face, and the spiky-haired Teresh, cheering, rushes to catch them below. The girls run to his tortured body.
    "Crazy!" - Annie shouts from afar. This is already a cause for joy.
    But not for Jesper. He stands lonely at the top, looking alternately at the sandy slope and at his white sailor pants.
    "No," he mutters, frowning, picks up the backpack Han left behind and sets off down the long path through the woods. He walks at the fastest pace yet, which wouldn't be an indecent trot. From the pine-needle studded walkway, the boy turns onto a suspension bridge between two hills and then descends a ladder to the boardwalk on the other side. The road to the beach seems endless. He imagines in advance with horror all the nonsense that the sloppy Han will say. How can he play along with them now, if nothing has been agreed upon beforehand?
    Only half an hour later, Jesper comes down to the beach - and perplexedly spreads his hands next to the empty bedspread.
    "Excuse me, please! Have you seen where the guys who jumped off over there went?" - He points to a cliff in the distance. There's an old man keeping an eye on the girls' things. Jesper concludes that wherever they are, they haven't gone far. Exhausted by the sun, he sits down on a blanket with flowers woven on it. After pondering whether to take off his shirt - it's getting awfully hot - he decides in favor of decorum and, trying to keep his cool, lies down on his back on the blanket. The equanimity consists in an indifferent posture with his hands behind his head. It is the clouds that interest Jesper the most at the moment. He is immersed in thought. He is pondering.
    And then his nose picks up a tiny molecule of scented oil. Images flash before his eyes: lilies of the valley, open skin, the steam from his breath. Jesper turns his head, and over the beige plain of the beach blanket he reveals himself: a fragrant and alien world of girly things. There are terribly neatly folded white and pink dresses with bows, belts and other obscure things, Annie's dainty bracelet, and - in the woven beach bags - what girls usually eat. Jesper doesn't remember too well what it is, but he knows for a fact that it's not much. As far as he knows, girls don't like to eat at all.
    In silly admiration, he reaches for the vial peeking out of his tiny purse. The vial of aromatic oil is shaped like a pomegranate. Jesper watches mesmerized as the golden liquid shimmers behind the crimson-red glass facets. The world disappears. Still holding the vial in his hand, Jesper, not knowing why, furtively slips a rubber band into the breast pocket of his sailor shirt with his other hand. He leans back again and looks at the sun through the glass of the vial. Time freezes in the crimson heart of the pomegranate-as suddenly, out of nowhere, Charlotte's long legs stand over Jesper. Tiny May, sitting on Teresh's shoulders, looks Jesper straight in the eye, "Annie, why did he take your perfume?"
    The charms dissipate, and the synapses in Jesper's brain immediately erupt with electrical signals, preventing confusion from showing on his face.
    "Revacholiere," he says solemnly, and with the look of a connoisseur adds: "Granate, number three. A very good choice: strong notes, natural oils; juniper berries give a more airy sound... Yes, an excellent choice, what can I say. Annie, yours?"
    Jesper takes his time and sits down with dignity. Han and Teresh look anxiously toward the girls-especially Annie, licking the lime ice cream with a smile.
    "Mine," she answers a little sharply, but continues more courteously, "Your mother is in the perfume business, right?"
    "Well, right now it's more about importation than production. But it has certificates and everything else. You know, I've been to the perfume factory in Revashol and I've seen Granate distilled."
    "Have you been to Revashol?" - Even Charlotte is impressed. To them at school, she - with her fancy clothes and her high school friends - is something of a goddess. And now the goddess's eyes are wide with wonder. Jesper's ears blush.
    "Once - Mom's colleagues invited her on a field trip."
    Now that the main danger is over, Teresh feels it's time to bring Jesper back down to earth: "You smell like flowers!"
    Tiny Mai on his shoulders laughs with a ringing laugh, no matter what he says. He's a lucky man. Teresh never thought he could get along with the little ones, but now that gift and the crazy bounce have kept him afloat for three-quarters of an hour. There's no use for Khan. He misses almost all the passes Teresh gives him, and if he doesn't, he doesn't hit the ball, just mumbles.
    Annie sits down on the bedspread next to Jesper, red as a beet.
    "Jesper smells nice to me. Certainly not socks or this locker room.
    "You've got a creepy place there," Moline says softly.
    "It's all Von Fersen," Hahn scores his first goal of the game, "Ugh... Fersen has some special athletic socks. They make such a stink, it's just not normal."
    Teresh sighs with relief. They were stuck in line for ice cream for a long time. Han and Teresh were not, even in a quiet environment, good conversationalists, and Teresh's plan was to bury any mention of binoculars under a verbal avalanche before Jesper arrived. Fortunately, Mai, sitting on his limbs, chattered away and made everyone laugh.
    Now he decides he's had enough. He gets May off his back and, with a meaningful wink at Jesper, casually says, "Did you get everything? Cigarettes? Binoculars?"
    But Annie-elin doesn't go for cigarettes: "What were you doing with those binoculars? We saw yesterday that there was something shiny all the time - like a mirror. Scary interesting!"
    "Just looking at the birds. There's a pair of white-tailed eagles nesting there..." - Teresh barely has time to begin, when Molin grins, showing his sharp teeth: "On the birds, then?"
    Annie, sitting next to Jesper, chuckles, and the wicked goddess Charlotte snidely remarks: "Yes, such bird-watching is popular with gentlemen this time of year."
    Jesper is drenched in paint again, but somewhere deep beneath Maciejek's freckles, Frantisek the Brave raises his exuberant head. It's time! And now he rushes forward, defying caution, to the most alluring, the most incredible of rewards. That's the way it is with us goyko's: all or nothing.
    "Goląbeczko moja," all Teresz Maciek turns into the most charming of smiles, "If so, we have seen the rarest of birds.
    How often for us unwashed goyko's, "all or nothing" turns out to be nothing. But not on this day. On a hot, sunny day, twenty years ago. Šar-lot-ta! Her shoulders lift, her collarbones looming beneath her skin. Under the curves of her eyebrows, in her cold green eyes, a smile lights up for a microsecond, the light of a distant star. That smile is for Teresh.
    She says, "Chance!"
    How happy Teresh is! How well it all adds up! Hours pass, the shadows grow, the white sand becomes first yellow, then orange and striped. The girls throw their beach blankets over their shoulders, little Mai yawns and falls asleep under the towel. The wind calms down and quietens altogether. The Kingdom. In the distance, a horse-drawn carriage whirls by the bus stop. You can hear the wheels on the tracks, music coming from someone's yard. The beach empties out, and the blue sky begins to turn purple at one end. Teresch tells the girls about her father's diplomatic cottage, about plans for the summer, about what they are going to do tomorrow. The shadows of the beach cabins stretch and crawl across the sand like the hands of a clock. Long clouds hover over the water's surface with feathery bellies, the sky near the horizon sheds turquoise, purple, a cool dark orange. Moline tries on Han's glasses, and Han puts on Moline's big sunglasses and sees nothing in them. Only girlish silhouettes, which make you dizzy, flicker inside - like candle lights, only darker.
    "Get some cider!" - Anni-Elin shouts from the door of the last streetcar. The four gray horses start to move, the streetcar interior glows yellow in the twilight, and May, in a white dress with angel wings, is dozing in Moline's lap. The good stepmother's magic wand falls from her hands to the sand-strewn floor.
    The three boys at the bus stop stare at each other with their mouths hanging open until the streetcar disappears over the hill.
    Warm, sour breath ripples the white hotel sheet near the linoleum salesman's mouth.
    Linoleum Salesman. Linoleum salesman. Linoleum salesman. With his left hand he holds a knot of a sheet around his neck near the back of his head. The knot is carefully designed and securely tied. The cool air enters the eighth-floor Havsenglar Hotel room through the ajar balcony door. This balcony offers a great view of the nighttime beach. On the mats on the balcony floor lies a protective telescope, removed from its tripod. Scout model. The eyepiece is fitted with a photo attachment. The balcony, and only this balcony, not the next room or hallway, because the linoleum salesman doesn't like it there anymore...
    Because only here, on this balcony, does he clearly hear the heavy breath of evil.
   
    *****
   
    Evening, twenty years later.
    At the barred window of the interrogation room, Vidkun Heard looks at the agent of the International Police. His gaze is full of contempt. Heard is dressed in his gray prison jumpsuit. On the reflective strip is the name "Vidkun Heard" and a number with initials.
    An International Police Agent removes his jacket and tosses it carelessly on the windowsill. There are sweat stains on his shirt under his arms. His movements are uncoordinated. On his chest is a freshly printed one-time pass with an identification code.
    The fan is humming.
    "Eh, you're drunk! - Vidkun looks back at the guard standing by the door. - He reeks of vodka... I don't agree. Would you be so kind as to take me back?"
    Heard smirks, hearing scraps of conversation between the agent and the guard.
    "Five minutes...ten minutes...talking about a child's life..."
    The guard closes the door behind him, and for a moment a strangely shaped key sparkles in Teresh's hand.
    "Ma-chee-ek," Vidkun drawled. - So you're a goyko! A lower form of life of the second order, like Gavrilov's dog." This time Heard is restrained hand and foot; the massive shackles uncomfortably bend his arms behind his back. But, nevertheless, he manages to give his pose a certain regality.
    "You lied. Who showed you the drawing?" - Teresh can't focus his gaze and blinks angrily.
    "Did you know that eugenics research praises the humble disposition of the goyko?"
    "Where'd you get the drawing, dummy?"
    "Your breed is advised by scientists to be crossed with Kiptians. To get perfect workers".
    "Shut up!" - Teresh lowers the steel curtains on the interrogation room windows. With a jerk. The shiny metal plate rattles around, and almost immediately you hear the nervous rattle of a key in the keyhole.
    "You shut up, you idiot. We respect the Declaration. It's not hail anarchy here.
    In the room behind the steel curtains, in the sterile iron-gray light, Terez Maciek stands up and opens his suitcase on the table. A single iron box, with "ZA/UM" written in white letters, takes up its entire volume.
    Hird's eyes roll out in horror. There is a knock on the door.
    "You don't have permission to be questioned! You must have permission! Show me your permission!"
    "What did you say? I can't hear it, there's some dummy squealing." - Teresh grabs an iron box and hits Heard in the face with it. Blood pours thickly into the prison overalls.
    Heard whines; a white bone protrudes from the bridge of his nose, amidst the red jelly. He faints. From behind the door come the muffled threats of the guard, but Teresh's cunning key securely blocks the keyhole.
    "I am an agent of the Teresh Macheek International Police, Mirowa, Grad, I have a legal right to be questioned, and if you don't stop..."
    The knocking fades for a moment, and the ZA/UM opens. Everything goes quickly, one might say beautifully. Teresh takes out catheters with dangling needles and yellowish tubes, fastens an eerie-looking device with a corrugated pump on his wrist, and tightens a rubber tourniquet on Hird's chained arm. After a bit of fiddling, he connects one of the catheters to the machine, and then pushes a needle into Widkun's vein. A small red drop of Hird's superhuman essence seeps into the tube.
    Behind the steel curtains, heavy boots rumble down the prison corridor. Reinforcements. Maciek flicks the lid of a device on his arm. A row of vials opens, filled with yellow liquid: like a smoker's teeth bared in a smirk. A faint hiss, and the first ampoule rattles into place. The pump on the lid shudders, and the machine on Macheek's wrist begins to breathe quietly, like a tame animal. He pumps the yellow liquid into Vidkun Hird's arm. The prisoner opens his eyes and gasps in horror.
    "You know what this is, scum?" - Teresh hissed through his teeth right into Heard's swollen face.
    A bit of blood mixed with saliva splashes in Maciek's face from Vidkun's mouth as he wheezes in panic, rolling his eyes: "I lied. You're right. I... I never saw them, that's my cellmate..."
    "I don't care what you think it's about."
    "...I don't think, I tell you, I had a cellmate, a few years ago, Direk..."
    "I don't care what you think. I want your truth." - Teresh's eyes are bulging and horrified. He rips the tourniquet off Widkun's arm, and the veins, swollen from the solution of meskin and lysergic acid, fall off before his eyes.
    Suddenly Widkun clenches his teeth so tightly that it seems as if they are about to crack. "You'll get nothing. You won't get anything from me now," he growls angrily, "I'm stronger! I'm so strong!"
    A battering ram hits the door with a rumble.
    "I like that you think so. It's even better that you think so," Teresh says, breathing heavily, and screws a second cannula to the machine. This one is for him. Carefully aiming, he stabs the needle into a vein in his wrist.
    When the first vial runs out, Teresh shares the next one with Vidkun, mumbling frantically into his open mouth: "It's a meat grinder. You have no idea how I'm going to fuck you. Yellow, urine-like fluid bursts through Vidkun's blood-brain barrier, and a terrible pressure from inside his skull swells his vertex like a bubble. Teresh grabs his head and screams in his face. His voice reaches Hird's consciousness like a white noise, pure, deafening violence.
    "I'm going to make you an idiot, do you understand?!!!"
    Vidkun's skull succumbs to the pressure from within and bursts open in the agent's hands like a flower. It is as if something is born from there. Helplessly clinking his handcuffs, Heard tries to catch with his hands what's coming out of his head. Pieces of his brain slip through his fingers to the floor. He can't hold them, they're too slippery, too many of them.
    "There it is, your cunt, there you are, in front of me, now I'm going to open you up," Teresh whispers hoarsely, and the whole of Vidkun Hird opens before his eyes. Twitching in the agent's iron claws, Heard struggles to tell him, to tell him what he wants to know, to say it in human language, but his mouth no longer obeys; and all the while Teresh wanders in his head like a tiger in shallow water - all the while Vidkun sees only one thing in the mirror of his mind. From that cool surface, where Vidkun escapes the carnage in his own head, Charlotte Lund's dark green eyes stare back at him. In the depths of her pupils flickers the chance that has been given to Teresh. It is so beautiful and so maddeningly sad that when Teresh, panting, drops his head on the interrogation table, Vidkun begins to sob.
    Up ahead, the coast of Vaasa glistens, and beneath my feet is the night ripples from the patrol boat rushing across the water. In the distance, the yellowish dome of light pollution shines over the city. They seem so festive-these white and yellow city lights that Teresh can fit in his fist. It's cold outside, but he's without a coat. The sleeves of his thrown-on jacket are dangling, and his white shirt is splattered with Vidkun Hird's blood. The agent's hands are handcuffed comfortably in front; a young officer helps him up to the deck.
    "What did you do there?" - asks the officer.
    "...I'll compose you a symphony," sings a rattling transistor radio from the cabin.
    "Hey, thanks for getting me out - it's an amazing night!"
    "You're welcome..." - the officer grinned.
    "Except can't you make the song louder?"
    "What?"
    "Louder! I promise I won't jump overboard!"
    "I'm rather afraid you'll fall overboard, but all right. - The officer retires to his cabin, and soon an upbeat rhythm can be heard on deck through the noise of the waves and the hum of the engine; the singer sings in a falsetto: "My love, I will compose you a symphony, and you will understand how much you mean to me..." Teresch begins to stomp to the beat. With a sense of lightness that only comes to him after using "ZA/UM," he says dreamily:
    "You know, I just solved the disappearance of the Lund sisters."
    "What?"
    "Never heard of it? Such a high-profile case!"
    "When was that?"
    "A long time ago, you weren't born yet. But it doesn't matter. I feel so good now. I think I've got it figured out!"
    Teresh laughs. The laughter is bitter, but sincere, very sincere, and the night over the North Sea laughs back at him.

▲
6. FRANTISEK THE BRAVE
⬍
    6. FRANTISEK THE BRAVE
    Perhaps the saddest cases of disappearances are those that have been solved. At a time when the Peremennaya Vera was just the Vera River and no hydroelectric power plant had yet been built on it, operetta star Nadia Harnancourt threw herself into its waters. She was at the zenith of fame. It could have stayed that way: one fall evening, after a brilliant performance, Nadia simply disappeared, and her heavenly soprano remained echoing in the halls of the opera house. Was the old man who saw her on the bridge in her evening gown - or the fanatical admirer who claimed to have met her a year later in Revachol? Perhaps there is some truth in the popular author's paranoid tabloid novel, where Nadia turns out to be a Meskian spy, a nihilist, and a messenger of the apocalypse. Who can say?
    One thing was certain. No one wanted to see the remains of Nadia in her evening gown showing out of the silt deposits beneath the dam. No one wanted to see the clam colonies in her eye sockets, the dead smile of her golden teeth, or the stunned faces of the hydroelectric plant builders.
    Failures. The world is woven of them. History is a tale of failure, progress is a succession of failures. Development! proclaims the futurist. Failure, the rebel admits. Hangover! cries the moralist from the back row. Failure pisses the rebel off. Grey time, he swears. Failure of the Creator is the end of an era. Kras Mazov puts a bullet in his head, and Abadanaiz and Dobreva drink poison on one of the islands of the Ozone. The wind blows the flesh off their bones into the sand under the palm trees. Who could have known? Good people, the salt of the earth, gathered together. Teachers, writers, migrant workers squatting in the trenches ... young soldiers escaping from military units. What beautiful songs they sing! They are brave, beloved children of History-so it seems to them; they wave white flags with silver deer antlers.
    And they are defeated.
    Coup attempts are suppressed. Anarchists are piled into mass graves on les Immensités Bleues. The Communists are thrown off the Isola de la Graade and retreat into the Samara hinterland, a bureaucratic deformed workers' state. The disappearance of the revolutionary lovers is revealed thirty-five years later when the embraced skeletons of Abadanaize and Dobreva are found on the beach of one of the unnamed islands of the Ozonne, Eugène, the eight-year-old scion of the big banker Rich Lepomme. He stands in short pants, with a net in his hands, and looks curiously at the bones of his past, which are still clinging to each other. Faded and smooth. Where does one begin and the other end? Time has shuffled them like a deck of cards. Later, Risch will build a hotel and a world-renowned wellness center there.
    But the main failure was not that Masov's world revolution turned into a massacre and collapsed afterwards, nor that the bones of the beloved revolutionaries were displayed in the foyer of an aromatherapy salon. Having suppressed domestic unrest, Graad becomes a world power, a superstate; its cities proliferate, and even from orbit you can see the glittering web of its metastases. Entire countries disappear from the world map. Countries where Mazov once had many supporters. Countries like Zemsk. Countries whose inhabitants are referred to by the pejorative generic term "goyko." So long ago that they started calling themselves that.
    Teresh Maciek is seven years old. His father, a diplomat and collaborator, has not yet brought him to school in Vaasa. On the border of Zemsk and Yug-Graad, a city (slash) grows up a zone of ecological disaster: a human settlement at the penultimate stage of development, after the megalopolis and before the necropolis - the Polyfactory. This monster eats up the historical centers of Zemsk - the old royal capital of Ferdydurke, the pine parks of Lenka. Summer arrives, and one name begins to be whispered in the twilight of the basements. It is shouted by children in the yards. The trees in the quiet streets rustle the leaves anxiously, and the Graadian policeman hears that name in its rustle.
    "Frantisek the Brave..."
    The bravest of the goyko. Movie star, revolutionary. At the end of spring, the people's unrest was brutally suppressed, and since then there has been no news of him for two months. It is said that he is hiding far away in the taiga, on a Djikut reservation, and is learning the secret knowledge from the priests of the dying out indigenous people. I can't believe it! He has an eagle's eyebrow, a sorrowful look, and his gentle smile is like a sunrise over the taiga. He saves this smile for rare moments when his stern, severe eyebrows are not frowning with heavy thoughts... His strong-willed face is seen by brave workers of a knitting factory - in forbidden films, on a screen of cloth for shirts and underpants. No, Frantisek the Brave is in Samara! He is negotiating. He will return with the People's Army! Don't be silly, Frantisek is far away in Katla, beyond the Winter Orbit, in the cabin of Ignus Nielsen. They will never find him there! Nonsense! Frantisek the Brave is not hiding! Only yesterday he was seen at the market, in a false beard and butcher's apron, and now his name is Wozam Sark-read it backwards!
    But months go by, no news, and then autumn arrives. Factory soot, like a widow's veil, falls on the golden and red leaves. In October, very different conversations will begin to circulate in Zemsk. Quiet and bashful.
    Frantisek the Brave was shot behind a garbage dump.

▲
7. THE WORLD IS BROKEN, TIME HAS GONE OFF THE RAILS
⬍
    7. THE WORLD IS BROKEN, TIME HAS GONE OFF THE RAILS
    Inayat Khan has been tossing and turning in his bed under the cellar window for an hour. It was getting dark outside, and the whitish light of a street lamp was penetrating the room. The basement is filled to the top with junk, and in the smoky blue light falling from the window, dust particles glisten as if they had frozen in place. On the tables, covered with cloth, the dormant shapes of objects - evidence of disappearances - slumber. On the walls are dark squares of picture frames, the shadow of a booth scatters on the floor. In a place of honor in the center of the basement, a glass display case gleams softly and invitingly. An army of things on countless shelves froze in anticipation. Get up, dear collector! You've been in bed so long-we know you're awake.
    Han fumbles with his hand at the headboard of the bed. With familiar movements, he unearths things, fumbling for the tape recorder button. Curling up in a ball under the covers suddenly seems like a much better idea. The boots of passersby on their way home from work shuffle on the wet sidewalk outside the window, and Han makes a desperate attempt to doze off again, if only for a little while. Come on! Han's wonderful toys say. Let's listen to our merry wake-up song! Han's atrophied heart muscle begins to ache from even the slightest effort, and sleep is no longer possible. His hand reaches for the headboard again, his finger crawling over the ivory tape keys. Under the covers, everyone is holding their breath with excitement. And then there is a click, a few bars of pure tape rustling, followed by smooth guitar arpeggios and the soft sounds of an old-fashioned electric organ.
   
    It's been a long, long time,
    long time
    How could I ever have lost you...
   
    There are loud sounds of drums and bass coming out of the left channel.
   
    ...when I loved you?
   
    Dressed in pajama pants, Han sits up in bed to the sound of drums. He climbs out of the sheets like a snake out of an old skin and slips his feet into pointy-toed slippers that look like Little Muhi's shoes. His unshaven chin trembles in a last yawn, and finally Khan opens his big almond-shaped eyes wide and puts on his glasses. He ruffles his hair and begins to lazily sing along. His voice is beautiful.
   
    It took a long, long time,
    long time
    Now I'm so happy I found you
   
    A furry belly hangs slightly over the waistband of his pajama pants; waiting for the bridge, Han plays along on invisible drums...
   
    How I love you
   
   
    ...and flicks a switch with his foot. The old light bulbs turn on and off to the beat of the drums. The filament hums for a second, then goes out. A dodecahedron signed by the missing dodecaphonist-composer Count de Perouse-Mitresi drops from golden light back into darkness. The bulbs light up again, and the title on the book's spine, "Los Desaparecidos," emerges from the gloom.
   
    So many tears,
    I was searching
    So many tears, I was waiting
   
    The song climaxes, and Han shamelessly sings along in his voice, moving around the basement like a performer on stage. Rows of lamps on the ceiling illuminate the neatly arranged objects on the tables. Wooden alphabetically labeled file cabinets, a portrait of Nadia Harnancourt in an oval medallion, a map of the Erg desert with a hypothetical route by which Ramut Karzai went to the dunes to ask for an audience with God. The pins mark the places where he might have met his mysterious demise along the way. As he passes the tables, Khan pulls the covers off them, and mystery after mystery appears to his eyes. Here the gold and green ships are lined up in marching order, with carved seraphic dragons on their bows - twelve miniatures the size of a palm. Rows of oars in dark blue imitation sea water with white wave crests; the ships' papyrus-yellow ribbed sails are proudly unfurled. On the decks stand men in reed armor, pennants fluttering on their spears. This is Gongzi's thousandth expedition. More than three thousand years ago, on the orders of Emperor Saphras, they sailed east from the coast of Samaria. They sailed for peaches, which were supposed to grant the emperor immortality. And they never returned. Two and a half millennia later, traces of their settlement are found to the east, on the Anise Islands. All things considered, Gongzi's expedition could not return. The emperor was an absolute monarch, cruel and bloodthirsty, and no peaches are immortal.
    All these dear to my heart items - souvenirs, things left behind - have to do with Han, too. And how much it hurt! It's so strange... he never quite understands why. But still he smiles, squinting blissfully, like a big fat cat being scratched behind the ear.
    On the desk stand, in the light of the table lamp with the green shade, it was all about girls. Newspaper clippings, a pile of notes, and, in the center, copies of the Moline letters. Graphological analysis showed an impossible 95% match. The letters came a year and a half after that last day in Charlotteal. They were addressed to the girls' parents. "We are doing well. One man has us," writes someone calling himself Moline. - We love you."
    Han puts the coffee pot on the primus, and the music is quiet and gentle again, as it was in the beginning. This is his favorite place. His favorite place in the world. He could listen to it forever. With a sad smile, he shakes his head and presses his hands to his heart.
   
    Now I can see you,
    Feel you
    How did I ever misplace you?
   
    I hear the rustle of wheels outside - a car has stopped in front of the house. A light rain starts tapping through the basement window. The tape recorder clicks and the song ends. There's a calendar hanging by the door that hasn't been turned a page in two months. It's still August on it, and under the number 28 it says "International Day of the Missing." The twenty-eighth of August is in their honor. That's the day.
    "Ini, your friend Jesper has arrived, brush your teeth!" - Han's mother shouts from upstairs, from the kitchen.
    Khan throws his robe over his pajama pants and walks up the basement stairs.
    In the middle of the room in a glass display case stands Harnancourt.
   
    ******
   
    Two years ago.
    The clinking of crystal glasses. Saturday evening, restaurant in the Telefunken tower. Outside the panoramic floor windows, Vaasa spreads out. A ghost hunkered down on the ground. Darkness, snow and lights.
    It's expensive here, but not tastelessly expensive. That would be unacceptable: the customers are too socially responsible. The cuisine is five-star, but what about the audience? Top class! Look - here's the head of the Communications Authority and his wife. Here's the CEO of Frybank having dinner with the charming singer Pernilla Lundquist and a businessman from Vesper. The enchanting singer eats an olive salad, the CEO praises his Vesper partner's lobsters. Try them by all means, they're terrific here! And over there, next to the bearded professor, isn't Konrad Hessle, a four-time Oscar Zorn nominee? A very educated man... The CEO of Freibank, of course, is wearing a suit from P. Black. Wait... Who's that? That's a 30-year-old loser! The loser lives in his mom's basement. The loser is wearing the same blue frilly shirt he wore in high school.
    "We hate you, loser!"
    "Who let him in here?"
    "What a sorry sight, he must be on a date. Poor thing! That woman hasn't said anything to him for ten minutes... What a bore, I'd hang myself!"
    "Should I give him some money? Just a little, like ten reals, maybe he'll feel better.
    "Ugh, nasty loser, don't give him anything, I hate him!"
    "He certainly won't be able to pay the bill! Of course he can't (hysterical laughter) - one wine will cost four reals, ha-ha-ha!"
    "I hate you, die, loser, how much I hate you!"
    Khan starts sweating again and tries to cover his ears with his hands... Shaking his head, blinking, anything to stop this barrage of taunts, and suddenly - silence! Sitting across from him, a brunette woman with sharp features twirls a glass in her hands. The boredom is stifling. The woman examines the carousel of the panoramic floor, the beautiful texture of the dark brown table beneath her hands... And then, a glimmer of thought!
    "It's a very beautiful place. Is it a new interior? I think so... The last time I was here, it was very different.
    Khan's eyes brighten.
    "Yes, yes! This design was developed by a friend of mine! He likes this style, simple, minimalistic. I don't remember very well now and I could be wrong, but I think he, well... he invented it. He's pretty famous."
    "De la Gardie?"
    "Jesper. Yes".
    "So you know him? He's so talented!"
    "Oh, of course. Jesper and I have been friends for a long time. We met before he was famous. Honestly..." Han smiles nervously, "I don't think I could get a reservation here. If, well..."
    "Ah! That's what I thought."
    "What were you thinking?" asks Han, but the brunette doesn't answer him. She goes silent again. Hahn glances around the room at the guests, who seem for a moment to have stopped mock whispering. In the distance, near Conrad Gessle's table, he sees some woman introducing a skinny man with blond hair to a documentarian. The waiter also notices the blond man and hurries to serve him "the usual" - water on the rocks with a slice of lime. In his dark gray suit and with a slice of lime in his teeth, the blond looks very young and somehow elegantly sleep-deprived. The chic way his simple T-shirt is paired with his jacket is enviable. He can afford it. The t-shirt has a picture of the cover of the famous DJ's iconic album.
    "Jesper!" - Han shouts with misplaced enthusiasm across the tables. His companion is slightly startled and looks questioningly toward Jesper and Hessle.
    "There he is," Han says to the brunette with joyful relief. He stands up so his friend can better see where he is.
    "Jesper, hey!"
    Like this, with sweat stains in the armpits of his blue ruffled shirt, he stands in the middle of the panoramic restaurant at the Telefunken and sees Jesper frowning indignantly as he holds out his hand to Conrad Hessle. He pretends that he doesn't know Han.
   
    ******
   
    "Ay-ya!"
    Eighteen years ago, on a hot Saturday afternoon, Annie scrapes her leg on a briar patch under her short skirt. Angry, she emerges from the bushes, and the gallant Dr. Jesper immediately rushes to her.
    "What is it? Let me see!"
    Annie lifts her skirt up a little, then swats it with her hand.
    "Ah, it's nothing, stupid bushes-oh!" - she stops talking halfway through, but her mouth seems to say, "How beautiful!"
    "Beautiful," Jesper pronounces, still seeing Annie's shin and the rising edge of her pleated tennis skirt in his mind. Han pulls back the bushes, Charlotte and Moline walk out onto the cliff and open their mouths.
    "Yes, I can see why you're always sitting here. It's such a nice breeze..." Breeze ruffled Charlotte's auburn hair, and it fell into her eyes. - Mmm..." The girl squinted and tossed a strand carelessly from her face.
    The wind rips off and lifts the white petals into the air. Mai seems to fly over the thicket in her winged dress. She draws figures in the air with her fairy stepmother's wand and feels like the most important person on earth. May rides on the shoulders of Teresh, who cares nothing for the thorny bushes. After he gets through them, he sets Mai down on the lawn. Teresh is all scratched up and smiling stupidly. A gust of salty wind fades and the syrupy-sweet smell of flowers fills the air. Insects hum. All seven of them barely fit in the boys' secret clearing-but that's how it was meant to be.
    Anyway, Jesper is very pleased. The boys stayed up all night. They were anticipating, making plans, making preparations. You could say the time flew by without a notice. Teresh was against the cliff because of the long way and thorns. But Jesper and Han decided that this place was the best. And so it turned out to be! While the girls are admiring the view, Han tells them about an ancient Graad cruiser looming on the horizon: class, capacity, resistance to Greyness. Moline doesn't seem to have started yawning yet. Best of all, even though it's windy, the weather is so warm that Annie decides to sunbathe.
    Molin unfolds the blanket and lies down next to the chirping Mai, side by side with Han. Han strains his memory, but, unfortunately, has nothing more to say about the ancient aerostats. Let Jesper and Teresh support the conversation now. He lies down on his back and closes his eyes.
    The orange shimmer of the sun, the noise of the sea, and the rustle of the percussion slowly fade, and in a sci-fi dream, the boy sees a cosmic autumn high in orbit. Vibrations, as always. And the cold. A faceless, bottomless epipherium spreads out behind the backs of metal giants. Forgotten in the sky, ancient communications satellites calibrate, unfolding their rusty bellies parallel to Earth's surface. Catapult hinges turn, parts fall into place; man-made boulders screech like a crane's flock at the edge of the stratosphere, communication units screech into the ether. The faceted eyes of the gauges look down to where the southern coast of the Isola Catla blooms in a fleeting flash of summer. The land, like a beautiful vision, slumbers in a cool cradle of thousand-kilometer arcs and spirals of Greyness. It is the past, looming, all-consuming. Greyness is everywhere. But matter, with its dark green forests and white beaches, the shimmering solar mirror of the North Sea, the archipelago of Vaasa, and tiny Charlotteyal still hang on. And the less matter there is left, the tighter the space where it can fit - the more magical its glow.
    All together, they lie in a semicircle on the green grass at the top of the cliff, and below, the waves crash against the shore. Above, in the sky, fluffy as absorbent cotton, vy från ett luftslott; cloud cities are reflected in the refracting surfaces of Han's glasses. He opens his eyes.
    Charlotte Lund, enveloped in a fragrant cloud, pulls her dress over her head in one motion. The roundness of her body, the smooth, tanned skin, is revealed to the eye. Teresh worries, seeing how graceful her joints are. It's hot.
    Annie lies on her back, wearing her sunglasses as a headband. She is shy about her moles. Jesper does not dare say so, but he would very much like to see them. And Moline quietly unties the bow on her waistband to let the breeze blow under her dress. The dress swells up like a sail.
    "Cider!" - triumphantly announces a waist-naked Teresh. And indeed, from the darkness of the backpack a basement chill blows, and the vessel seized last night in an unprecedentedly difficult operation comes into view. Three liters. Drops of water sparkle on the glass, the airtight cork hisses, and a puff of carbon dioxide rises above the bottle's neck. The apple cider hisses, bubbles gather in foam.
    The girls' lips burn, and only little May drinks her lemonade with lemon slices, looking at her elders in bewilderment. Teresh cautiously brings the cold bottle to Charlotte's hot cheek. Her father will discover the missing cider next weekend-when he wants to offer it to the gallery owners and curators at a luncheon celebrating cultural collaboration. But Teresh doesn't care. Look how beautiful she is, Charlotte, and how happy she is. And her father is an intellectual defeatist, an "exemplary goyko," and an abettor of usurpers. Frantisek the Brave would not have thought of him.
    "Why are you silent?" - Molin asks in a low voice so that the others won't hear, and turns on his side, facing Han.
    Annie's ears perk up:
    "I didn't think you - and suddenly you'd say that. Well, about the socks!"
    "Come on," Moline laughs with a soft, warm laugh; Han can feel it on his ear. - Tell me something... you always have such interesting reports. Both history and science..."
    In the back of his mind, Han jumps up from behind a reclining desk and pummels his fist in the air in triumph.
    "Yes, yes! That story about the peaches was very nice!"
    "Annie, don't interrupt-" Moline frowned, "wait, what peaches?
    "Come on, Han, tell me, that was a hell of a story. About Ilmaraa, that fleet of theirs and the Emperor..."
    Han finally opens his mouth.
    "It wasn't that isola at all. It was about Samara."
    "Well, I'm sorry. I didn't mean to say anything so, well, racist."
    "Very funny, Jesper. Okay..." Han turns slightly toward Moline, too, careful not to face her. - You were sick at the time." - Han remembers it very well: he wanted to postpone the report so that the performance would not go to waste, but the teacher did not understand the subtlety of the situation.
    "Peaches occupy an important place in the mythology of Samara, or more precisely, Safra. On the Anise Islands there are not only cherries, but also peaches. They grow there by themselves, you can pick peaches right in the grove. Cultured apricots, peaches and nectarines all come from Samara. Even now a lot of fruit is brought to us from the SNR, through Gray.
    Moline listens diligently and nods.
    "Here. A long time ago, when Katla was not even inhabited yet, Emperor Safra sent his most celebrated navigator, Gong Tzu, for peaches that give immortality..."
   
    *****
   
    Twenty years later.
    The City of Vaasa is sinking into the blue. One of the streets of Königsmalm, rush hour, brightly lit with didrid-style carved lanterns. The dark gray dome of the sky, and beneath it, a crowd of people in northerly colorless clothing pass by, like a procession of ghosts from suru tales. Terech is feeling queasy - it's been so long since he's smoked. His head is heavy and aching, the nicotine presses on his eyes, the sounds seem distant, distorted. He sits on the steps in front of the police station, tucking the hem of his coat under his butt. The drizzle falls on his face, swollen from sleep.
    Five minutes ago his clothes were thrown in his face and he was released. The last fragments of the dream are still going on. They echo in the back of his head, the nightmare slipping along the shaky border between dream and dream, turning into a throbbing headache. It is generated by violence; usually it whispers: "Danger"-but sometimes he says he is a Man. He ducks the briar and watches them sit on the cliff. He is always there, he wants to separate them, but he waits patiently. There he is in the pine forest where Teresh learned to blow smoke rings, sneaking from one trunk to the next. He dodges the gaze of the binoculars on the beach, holds little Mai in his lap; Mai falls asleep, and the streetcar doors close. It is all-consuming, bottomless; it rests on nothing and could collapse inside itself at any moment. There are only days left. Soon life will be over. Wrong and terrible. Then, on the last night at the girls' secret beach, as they enter the water in the dizzying darkness, he walks over to the covers and sniffs their stuff. A man looks up from under a sun umbrella and takes a bite of a fried meat pie. Teresh becomes the ice cream maker Agnetha, and every time Man walks past the window, he sees a different face - out of the corner of his eye. He puts on the guise of Vidkun Hird, the adult Khan, whom Teresh is now afraid of for some reason, and sometimes becomes Teresh's father. Then Teresh will be ashamed that he saw his friends there, but there is nothing he can do about it.
    Slowly, timidly, he makes his way through the crowd, afraid to bump into anyone, to annoy anyone. People in dark clothes wander down the street, traffic lights switch at a wide intersection; motor-cars stop, puffs of smoke billow from their mufflers, engines roar. Along with the rippling mass of people, he walks through a crosswalk, and in the dusk, the light displays above him shine, a giant model in her underwear smiling high on the wall of a department store. Ahead, a pay phone booth glows. As soon as Teresch goes inside, a real downpour begins outside. Water pours down the windows, and somewhere - in Vidkun Heard's memories or in his own dream in the cell, Teresh can't tell - a monster squats in front of the dismembered bodies of the girls and puts them together, assembling a chimera.
   
    *****
   
    "You know-" Liquid mud squelches under the wheels of the cab, gravel crunches. Han looks out the window. - There's one thing... that I never told you... about me. - The car stops at the door of his house in Salem. The brunette holds her purse in her lap; Han opens the door. - I don't usually talk about it. It's not an easy subject. But I think I can tell you. In fact..." he comes out, leaning into the cabin, "I'm the world's leading expert on disappearances.
    Khan slams the cab door behind him, takes three steps across the sidewalk to the porch, puts the key in the lock, and enters the hallway of the wooden house. The engine rumbles from outside, and the car starts up. The house is warm and dusky. Potatoes are boiling in the kitchen.
    "Mom, that was awful! - Han picks up the phone hanging on the wall, next to which a sheet of numbers is pinned to the wallpaper with a button. - Just awful, don't ask!" - His brown fingers bounce over the keys: a series of sixteen digits, an interisolar call on the caller's account.
    "Mr. Hambartsumyan, I was given your number at the auction."
    "Mr. Hambartsumyan is busy right now," replies the secretary's voice, quiet and distant.
    "No, you don't understand, I'm calling about the Harnancourt. I need to get instructions for my blimp. It's very important...excuse me, can you hear me?" - The receiver hisses, the signal is lost in the Grayness. In the noise of time.
   
    *****
   
    Two years later.
    "Has Teresh shown up?" - Jesper asks, as he enters Han's hallway. The sweet smell of poverty enters my nostrils. What is it? Some kind of cinnamon? A layered muffin?
    "Not yet. I was going to ask you myself. To be honest, I'm beginning to worry. - Han, in a fluttering robe, leads Jesper straight to the basement. - Clothes here," he points to the rack above the stairs.
    Jesper is uncomfortable. It's the same strange smell he had back then. He hated it so much. He'd rather live on the street; he'd rather burn all this junk than suffer such a stench. On top of all that, he was afraid that poor old Mother Han would suddenly pop out of nowhere to meet him. But Han was adamant: they are meeting at his house, he is not going to go to town, or at his place, or nothing at all. And Jesper, because of his past sins, was in no position to argue. With a heavy heart he steps down the last step into the basement. But then such a sight opens before him that his inner boy gains the upper hand.
    "Wow!"
    "Yeah. As you would say, pretty good."
    "I would," Jesper swivels his big head around. "Oh!" he exclaims. - Gong Tzu!"
    He touches with his index finger the figure standing on the prow of the head ship of the Saffron flotilla. A tiny, fingertip-sized Gongzi, with a long floppy mustache like a Samaritan dragon, holds a pennant with the imperial emblem. In the other hand the figure holds a compass the size of a pinhead, a miracle device that Gongzi is said to have invented himself.
    "I finished putting them together a year ago. Remember, the last time I had only the ships ready, and they weren't painted yet. - Han stands proudly in the middle of the room.
    "Wait! What's that?" - Jesper points to the shiny display case behind him.
    "This... this is the diamond of my crown! The apple of my eye! Jesper, this is Harnancourt!"
    "The original?!" - Jesper approaches the display case reverently.
    "Of course not, don't be naive. The original is worth more than you are," Han chuckles with the condescension of a professional. - It's a copy. One of two."
    The graceful silhouette of the Harnancourt is frozen in the crystal clump of a display case. Jesper strokes the tall, taller than he is, glass box, trying to find where the backlight turns on.
    "Over there, on the edge, under the stand, there's a big switch."
    Jesper clicks a key and the lights come on - but not in the display case, but on the ten decks of the antique airship. The model, held in the air by invisible strings, floats in the center of the showcase like a swan made of silver and lacquered wood. On the panoramic first-class deck, behind walls of crystal glass, miniature chandeliers flicker in a four-tiered hall. Tiny passengers are frozen on the spiral staircase. It seems so light! So fragile. The silvery arches on the ship's hull curve out like sails and converge on the prow, the emblematic swan of Empress Shosta.
    "And yet they thought it was possible to cross the Grey. Isn't it amazing? Look! These are plaids," Han is so happy that he can finally show it to someone. - The plaids! In these baskets right here are plaids for walking outdoors! No, can you imagine? Right in Grey. Hand in hand with a lady. Honestly, I could look at that all day!"
    "I can see why. Yeah, it's not bad! Very, very good..." - Jesper walks around the display case and shares his discoveries with Han, as if he hadn't walked by it and sat in a chair next to the model every day for the past two years.
    "Sit over there, the view is especially good from there," Han points to the chair. But Jesper can't sit in the chair: "...wait, the propellers, they're not..."
    "Now would you kindly go back to that switch and press it again," Han says with a sly smile. Jesper runs his fingers through his hair and opens his mouth. The swan's large silver propellers, sharp as knives - six maneuvering on their sides, under the belly of the ship, facing the ground at different angles, and two more on the stern - begin spinning quietly and slowly at first, and then faster and louder. The blades disappear, merging into translucent shimmering disks. The propellers are so big and so dynamically pointed that Jesper thinks the ship is about to soar up out of the window and fly away, disappearing from space and history.
    On the hull of the ship in Graadic alphabet, in an elegant slanting script, is written the name: "Harnankur.
    Jesper unscrews the cap from the water bottle and Han pours himself a coffee. They sit down in the chairs in front of the display case. Looking at the ship, the interior designer feels the silly hope in his heart flare up again, which Han knows how to infect him sometimes. The lazy kitty is sipping hot coffee, still in his bathrobe and pajama pants, and Jesper casts a long, surprised look at him.
    "It's 7 p.m., have you been sleeping?"
    "Sounds a little depressing, I know."
    "What is, is," Jesper laughs grimly and stares at Harnancourt for a while. - I wonder why he hasn't called. Teresh. Yesterday. I have a second night to myself. I'm nervous already.
    "It's the same for me as usual. I don't sleep at night anyway. That's my way of life, a little bohemian," Han grinned, "Maybe he learned something from Heard and flew there right away.
    "What do you think, Heard, well, nothing himself..."
    " ...Couldn't do it? Pfft! I don't think so. That's absolutely fantastic! You have no idea how much these guys love to lie. I killed ten people! I've killed a hundred thousand! I've killed more than Erno Pasternak! They're all about numbers and posturing. But that drawing was..."
    "One and the same! I know!"
    "Exactly. There must be something else."
    "Yes, something else," Jesper stands up and removes his bag from the rack. - But I don't think Teresh went hunting alone. As far as I'm concerned, we have a deal. Everything about the girls, we do together."
    "So it is..." - Han agrees, out of the corner of his eye still absent-mindedly contemplating Harnankur. Suddenly a soft black bundle lands in his lap.
    "Here! A... um... acquaintance gave it to me. I guess she thought I got fat. Or something like that. It would suit you better."
    Han pulls a new Perseus Black shirt out of the package.
    "Wow, thanks, buddy!" - he thanks sincerely.
    "Now you can throw out that ruched thing."
   
    Goykov's blond hair is wet in the rain and appears almost black.
    "Excuse me, can you change ten reais?" - He leans toward the kiosk window in his long coat.
    A young saleswoman chews gum with an indifferent look:
    "No, we don't change the money."
    "Okay, give me the cheapest thing you have - matches, for example - and change in change, please."
    "We don't have matches, sorry." - There's nothing nastier than a teenage girl's nudging. The girl stretches her gum between her mouth and her fingers.
    "The hell with it, give me a pack of Astra!"
    "What?"
    "Astra.
    "What's this?"
    "...Lollipop, give me that lollipop over there!"
    Striped crimson caramel clatters against Macheek's molars. He tosses coins into the phone booth. The booth smells sweetly of rain; it's nice to watch the streams run down the glass. Teresh likes it in the booth. The lollipop isn't bad either. Good thing there were no matches in the stall. Clamping the tube between his ear and shoulder, he turns the dial on the payphone. His head clears up. The caramel is sweet and the raspberries are tart, as befits a raspberry. Damn, that Jesper is never home! On a shelf under the machine lies an open notebook with the International Police logo above the list of numbers. Teresh's rain-wet fingers leave stains on the pages.
    "X, X, Halamova, Khan." The dial of the machine rattles again, and behind the glass, in the gray glare of the Vaasa, dozens and dozens of people enter and leave the doors of the department store. The eagle on the Freibank emblem hovers above the bank building, golden in a halo of water spray.
    "Hello, may I hear Inayat Khan?"
    "Teresh, are you there?" - Han's mother's voice rings out anxiously.
    "Yes, that's me. Tell me, please, is Inayat at home?"
    "Wait, Teresh, listen to me. Stop torturing yourself. You know, I met the girls' mother here..."
    "Yes, of course - please..."
    "We talked to her..."
    Yes, yes, in one ear and out the other. If Khan's mother wanted to talk, you're screwed.
    "Mrs. Han! Please tell Inayat that I'm calling, it's urgent. I'm sorry."
    "Mom? Who is it? - Han's voice comes into the phone," Teresh?
    "No, that's Pernilla Lundquist, one of your many admirers," the older woman replies sarcastically. Teresh hears footsteps on the basement stairs and the noise of cars whizzing by. The door of the telephone booth is pelted with water.
    "Teresh!"
    "Hello, Han! Where's Jesper? We don't have much time."
    "Here," comes Jesper's voice from afar. - I'm here. It's Jesper." - There's nothing more satisfying during a ZA/UM hangover than the lively voices of friends.
    "Urgent to the city, to Lovisa. Hümning nursing home. Look somewhere, I don't know, in the phone book. Visiting hours will end at eight."
    "Humming, got it. What's in there?"
    "Direk Trentmöller. And also, I suspect... the Kegsholm Circle."
    "Teresh, the Kegsholm Circle is a bogeyman for girls!"
    "All right, if so."
    "What makes you think I don't? - Jesper is trying to get through to the tube. - Han, ask him why he thinks he's not."
    "Why do you think I don't?"
    "We'll talk on the spot, okay?"
    "All right, we'll take a cab. Jesper, do you have money for a cab?"
    "Check."
    "Yes, we'll take a cab!"
    From here on there is only the viscous heaviness of time, the distance between points, the cab route: pedestrians in dark clothes, the gray sky, and puffs of smoke on the freeway. Teresh Macheek. The flow of autumn minutes, smooth as traffic on the highway.
    Yes, Han's mother met the girls' mother in the doctor's waiting room. So what if it's her four daughters? What kind of person is she? "To lose all her children in one day. Do you have any idea what that's like?" Tell me better, what did this woman do to find them? What does it mean that she "found peace"? Mrs. Hahn's voice rattles through the telephone receiver, "If the mother, even the mother, is at peace, then you certainly can..." We can't. You see, we are mnemoturists. We love girls - yes, dare I say it - we love them more. And even this very moment, the evening city whizzing by outside the cab window in this broken world where time has gone off the rails, is already a crime. It must be changed. Fix it. No peace. No deals with demons!
    But listen! A string of motorcars glides past the side window, the sound of klaxons coming from afar: long, stretched-out notes in motion. Waiting. An hour, two hours, three hours, evening, next morning, next week, winter, spring, year, next year, ten, twenty years. In the flow of time, as if in a cloudy sky, thunder rumbles. A summer rain is about to fall! How about a little mnemoturne, boys? Why are you sitting there hanging your nose, you natural-born mnemonaut?! Some explore Greyness between isoles, they're called entroponauts; others discover new lands, they're explorers and sailors - and there's you! Mnemoturists! If longing creeps up again - throw off the burnt husk of the present and go back to those wonderful times!
   
    *****
   
    There is a stuffy, pre-hail heaviness in the air. Shore swallows dive toward the water, catching insects. Jesper watches them with an appraising eye.
    At first only one heavy drop falls. No one is paying attention. After all, it's still so hot, and the sun, like a white sickle, shines between the clouds. And the Saffron archaeologists have only just gone to the Anise Islands in search of traces of Gongzi's expedition. But Jesper knows what comes next. Such raindrops always lurk in the summer clouds over Katla. And Jesper also knows what time in the morning to turn on the radio. "The weather forecast for today," the announcer says. Everything goes according to plan.
    Khan, telling Moline's story, moves closer to her. He can already feel the hem of her polka-dotted skirt tickling his leg. While everyone is listening to Han, Jesper pulls beach umbrellas out of the bushes. He brings them close to the girls, unbuttons them, and opens the big beach umbrella on the cliff just as the rumble of thunder comes through the glowing cloud cover. Annie, who is sitting cross-legged on the ground in front of Jesper, lifts her head and laughs. A rain curtain glistening from the sun falls on the beach and the cliff. At Jesper's signal, two more umbrellas open: Han reveals his without interrupting the story, while Teresh shelters Charlotte, who listens with her cheek propped up by her hand and coquettes Mai. Mai braids his grown-out hair into small, protruding pigtails. The maneuver is brilliantly executed. In response to the girls' laughter, the knights only smile discreetly.
    "So warm! Feel it!" - Annie reaches out from under the umbrella to the tinkling piano strings of rain. Her spine curves in front of Jesper. The boy mutters something and stares mesmerized at the galaxy on her cat-like curved back. He wants to reach out and touch all the stars, one by one. The dusty smell of rain penetrates deep into his nostrils. What's the holding time for memories?
    "Oh!" Annie stretches her neck and twists her head in the rain. - You're different when you're not in school."
    "Yeah," Moline nods, "so thoughtful!"
    "You mean we're more mature?" - Teresh looks at Charlotte, raising an eyebrow questioningly.
    "Look, I've only seen you once in the lunch line," the girl giggled, chewing on a straw in a glass of bubbling cider, "I can't tell what's changed at all.
    "Well, Teresh was just a boy then," Jesper teased, "and now he's...a man.
    Moline laughs. There is so little room under the third umbrella that she has to curl up in a ball. A crown of golden hair falls into Han's lap, and rain falls on the beach umbrella. The girl tilts her head back and looks at Han with a long, strange look in her sparkling dark green eyes. Han swallows. Moline is the only one of the girls who doesn't want cider.
    "And how did it end? - her voice sounded as if from afar. - Why didn't they come back?"
    "That's the question. - Han cleared his throat meaningfully. - Why didn't they come back?"
    Moline suddenly sparkled his sharp teeth joyfully, laughing at his hunch: "They didn't want to give the peaches to that insolent emperor!"
    "Nonsense," Han says in his heart. - There's no such thing as peaches immortality!"
    Charlotte sits down, "What if, how do you know? Do you think Gongzi and a thousand of his sailors were afraid to return because the emperor would have had them executed? If I were Gong Tzu," Charlotte looks at Mai and makes a dragon mustache with her fingers, "and found peaches that make you immortal, I wouldn't tell anyone! I would share them secretly, only with my best friends. We'd travel the world together for a thousand years. And see what wonders people come up with!"
    "Will you give me an immortal peach, Lotte?" - Little Mai looks at her older sister.
    "Sure. But only later, when you're older.
    "Why do I have to get older?"
    "So you won't stay a little booger like that forever, but a beautiful girl like me," Charlotte says.
    "No..." Teresh shakes her head as she watches the dreadful Charlotte raise her chin proudly, her hair sweeping over her shoulder like a brush. - No one will ever be that beautiful." Han and Jesper are silent, discouraged by this sudden change of strategy. Charlotte exhales, her ribcage slowly contracting. And at the same time, the capillaries in her cheeks expand.
    Teresh stares at her intently: "What about me? Can I have your immortal peaches, too?"
    "Let's see," the girl grinned, coping with her excitement. - First you have to bring me something."
    "You just tell me what."
    Out of the corner of his eye, Han sees Molin looking over his sisters conspiratorially. Something is about to happen.
    Annie slips her tanned legs into her tennis skirt: "Next time it's our turn, right? And our spot. Don't think we don't have our own secret place," she glares at Jesper. - What are you doing on a Saturday?"
    The boys do nothing on Saturday: "I do nothing, absolutely nothing, let me look in my notebook - nothing!"
    "We're going to be sent to the country for a week. To the beds," Annie wriggles out, resting her shoulder blades and pulling her skirt up her ass, "but we can meet at the beach on Saturday night, right?"
    "Of course. Yes, of course. One hundred percent," the boys replied.
    Charlotte's purse jingles in her hand. The girls' eyes again draw lines between the boys, like trigonometry. The rain has stopped, but individual drops still glisten here and there in the air. The bright sun emerges from the clouds, and, surrounded by its rays, the ninth-grade goddess covers Little May's ears with her hands, then, squinting, looks at the boys, "In our place. Bring on the cherry speeds."
    "What?" - Jesper opens his mouth.
    "Red-nye-speedy," Annie pronounces. Her pink tongue bounces off her palate on the last syllable.
    "It's like amphetamine," Charlotte explains in a casual tone. Her rounded chest rises and falls as she speaks. - Only it's kind of... special. The very best. And we want to get high with you."
    Silence.
    The sun-heated wet briar fruit gives off steam.
    A white-tailed eagle hangs motionless in the sky.
    "May's staying home, isn't he?" - Teresh still has funny pigtails sticking out of his head. Han and Jesper watch as he holds out the Astra to Charlotte.
    "Of course, you fool!"
    "Then let's," he says, "let's do that!"
    Moline smiles at Han, and a boundless joy shines in her eyes. Businesslike, as a teacher's daughter should, she explains her task to him: "Ziga's number is in my purse. Call him, okay? He'll get it."

▲
8. LINOLEUM SALESMAN
⬍
    8. LINOLEUM SALESMAN
    A linoleum salesman wanders from town to town. He came to sell linoleum in Norrköping, a town on a big frozen river. Small wooden churches and narrow streets. The linoleum salesman admired the wooden architecture, the frozen serenity of the northern country. By nine o'clock in the evening the streets were deserted, and a gusty wind began to blow through the town. The wind blew, coat flaps fluttered, and snow, thick snow, fell on the roofs of the houses. Snow fell in the heart of the Linoleum Salesman. The orange rows of streetlights. What pictures flashed through his brain that night. In his rented room, under the blanket. What stories, what expectations. The linoleum salesman admired the two brothers in the garden next to his business partner's house: cherub faces, puffy mouths, cheeks ruddy with frost. And Arda, the beginning of a mountain range where the cliffs cut through the fjords. Brick red houses at the foot of snow-covered giants. And the nights when the windows flashed in the darkness like tiny eyes, and the blackened teeth of the mountains scowled into the sky. But their smile was no match for that of the Linoleum Seller.
    He was practicing. He tucked his chin like a caterpillar and cocked his upper lip. In the hotel room mirror, the man was turning into a worm. What would it be like to appear like this, in a basement with a low ceiling and concrete walls? What does it feel like to see something like this? Look at me, beautiful, look at me.
    The linoleum factory closed and hard times began. But the Linoleum Salesman got back on his feet. He made new contacts, met importers. And then a new linoleum factory opened. And no matter where he went, no matter what he saw, he always wanted to see more. He sold linoleum, but he considered himself a photographer. For him, the world created its own hidden landscapes, crucibles of beauty that only he alone could see.
    Like a child with a kaleidoscope, he played, breaking the pieces apart. The linoleum salesman went to sell linoleum in Grad, in the area beyond the Winter Orbit. The magnetic train was hurtling across the northern plateau. It was night, the northern lights over the glades outside the toilet window in the dining car, a black mountain tunnel engulfed the train. And when the Linoleum Salesman stepped outside, there was nothing but rattling shards of glass in his palms. Where had the delightful flower mandala gone? It was forever beckoning and hiding, luring - and then deceiving, a faceless shadow, a seductress. The linoleum salesman couldn't take it anymore. His greedy nervous system erupted. Yelinka. In the polar village, the man rubbed his face with snow - but the snow only melted from the heat of his nerves.
    Now he's resting, trying to hold his own. Running errands, selling linoleum to construction stores, design studios, and retailers. Brown Linoleum. Linoleum with a floral pattern. It comes down to Vaasa from the north. Selling linoleum in Kegsholm, Lovisa's upscale neighborhood, he sees something new. Something he never expected to see. He meets other linoleum salesmen. Only they don't sell linoleum. In the park, where the homosexuals gather, he talks to the ticket inspector - about Vaas, the sense of security, schools, free upbringing. The alder leaves whisper. They whisper to each other, too. They draw new ideas and knowledge. They share their stories. The owner of a tool rental, the Podologue...
   
    *****
   
    "Briefing," Teresh looks at his silver watch, a gift from colleagues in the manhunt department for a decade of service. - Five minutes." - Coat wide open, he walks beside Han and Jesper through the park of the nursing home.
    "Okay, okay, 'briefing,' just please slow down," Han doesn't keep up with the others. - I don't feel good."
    Jesper is in a hurry.
    "Hey, you have a serious heart problem. I think everyone here agrees - you need to see a doctor.
    "I agree," agrees Teresh.
    Behind the picket fence, the white window frames are visible in the twilight. The fallen leaves spring beneath Jesper's suede shoes. He looks at the muddy splatter on the toes of his shoes and waves angrily. It smells sweetly rotten. The wait is unnerving.
    "Your local authorities could have been more cooperative," continued Agent Maciek. - The spirit of cooperation and international solidarity leaves a lot to be desired.
    Khan tries to keep up:
    "Interrogated?"
    "Interrogated, yes."
    "Yesterday?"
    "No, this morning. The case dragged on. It can't be helped. Been on the phone all day yesterday like, I don't know, an acrobat. Must have been a hundred calls. Sorry."
    Teresh is a brilliant liar. Jesper doesn't doubt his words for a second:
    "Okay, what did Heard say?"
    "He hasn't even seen them."
    Noticing Han's sigh of relief, Jesper raises an eyebrow suspiciously. Frankly, he's a little disappointed himself. All this preparation. All for nothing. Oh, I can't wait for the funeral.
    "Wait, that's not all," Teresh raises his finger. He has black leather gloves on his hands; he smiles at his gesture. - Heard was kind enough to give me one name. Direk Trentmöller. That's who told him."
    Han suddenly stops and looks angrily at Teresh.
    "Did he just give you his name and lay it out like that? Tell me."
    Jesper doesn't understand why Han doubts their friend's interrogation skills:
    "Well, you must have skinned him seven times? Graad style?" He casts a approving glance at Teresh and walks on. - So. Direk what? Trentmiller?"
    "That's right. I checked. Everything matches. They were in the same cell eighteen years ago. The last year of Direk's sentence. He was released early. There's a catch. Remind me to tell you about it later. Anyway, here's the deal. They tell each other all sorts of life stories, and one day Heard gives away one particularly juicy one. Direk doesn't want to be indebted. After all, he's got something to brag about, too. He's got a friend who knows... you know where? In the Kegsholm Circle!"
    "Come on! Bullshit!" - Han is unimpressed.
    Teresh doesn't even lift a finger:
    "And this man from the circle - let's say for a minute that the circle really exists - he's kind of in charge there. A very bad guy. And very dangerous. A few years after the girls disappear, the head of the circle comes to Dirk and tells him how he and his friends kidnapped them. Yes, by the way: they are lovers - Direk and the leader of the circle."
    "Very nice."
    "And Direk mustn't say anything to anyone, or they'll kill him. That's it. But Direk tells Hird anyway. And you have no idea what..."
    Han and Jesper walk forward in silence. No one asks any questions. Only Jesper nods reservedly.
    "Anyway, that story was... hmm... impressive, even in the format of Heard and Dirk's communication. I did some digging on this Dirk, too. What I could find in the Kronstadt papers. Pederast. Mostly in the family, groping his sister's kids. But that's as far as it went. Eventually his sister reported him. In prison, Direk was a goody-goody. Told the pastor he repented, said it was "like something made him do it," Teresh said, wiggling his fingers skeptically, "and all sorts of other damn things.
    The back of the nursing home is sheltered by trees. The porch has a whitewashed wooden railing, and a stone porch leads to the back door. Fragile wooden architecture, the walls painted red, like in the old days. A house from Vaasa's past, just the kind to remind its inhabitants of their youth. Chestnut trees drop their last leaves onto the roof of the Humming.
    "By now Direk must be seventy. Or seventy-five, do the math. And do you know why he was released early?"
    Han and Jesper don't know why Direk Trentmöller, the homosexual lover of the head of the Kegsholm Pedophile Circle convicted of molesting minors, was released early from prison.
    "Because of senile dementia."
    "What? At sixty years old?" - Jesper guesses what kind of problems this threatens to cause.
    "Pretty much, yes."
    "And what, he's completely insane?"
    "I don't know. It didn't say how severe his condition was. Anyway, it was getting worse. And fast. We'll see."
    Khan follows the others up to the porch of the nursing home. The three of them stand in front of the wooden arched door. Teresh rings the bell.
    "The drawing..." Han breathed heavily, resting his hands on his knees. - Where did Heard get Annie's drawing?"
    "They kind of have it as an heirloom. Passes from hand to hand. If we find the man it came from, we'll have a funeral. That I promise you. We can finally start living," Teresh calls again, a little annoyed this time. - No one would have known if it hadn't been for Heard. The head of the Keghsholm..." catching Han's gaze, Teresh corrects himself, "...the leader of the hypothetical faction from Keghsholm showed it to Direk, and to Hird. I think Hird was just curious. He wanted to see what would happen.
    Teresh smirks maliciously.
   
    *****
   
    Vaasa slumbers in the blissful peace of the fifties. Winter is coming to an end. The icicles on the eaves are melting, and the drips are grinding holes in the ice on the sidewalks. The days grow longer, and somewhere far away, in the courtyard of a school downtown, Sven von Fersen pounces on a fat immigrant boy. Don't you think it hurts Moline to hear such gossip? А? What do you think? Teresch is standing away, at the gate, hesitant to intervene. He hopes Jesper won't stand up first. Reflection.
    The linoleum salesman paces the sidewalks of the suburbs, his boots covered in salt stains from the melting snow. The linoleum salesman has been up all night, his eyes hurting from the glare of the sun on the ice. His hands are shaking from the coffee, his head is buzzing. Nerves bluish-red; a pulsating baton of signals. Thousands of pictures from the night's conversation sprawl the Linoleum Salesman, he slips his hand into his pocket; there is a hole cut with scissors in his pocket at the bottom. He rides in circles on the Conca and gets off at the Fahlu stop each time, ducking under the bridge; he looks at the willow bush and gets on the streetcar again on the other side of the road. The linoleum salesman leans his head against the window. Sometimes he falls asleep, but even then his imagination keeps working, the shadow assumes more and more pretentious poses, spreads his legs in front of the Linoleum Seller. Even in his sleep, the desire does not let him go. But the Linoleum Salesman keeps his nerves in check. Outside the streetcar's window the clock strikes two, the school shift ends. The Linoleum Salesman's jaw trembles, he is awake. The streetcar fills with a crowd of children. At home, in the garage, demonstration rolls of linoleum are on display. This is where he lives now. In Vaasa, in Kegsholm. He walks the streets of Lovisa. The linoleum salesman is hanging by the handrail. He wants to curl up in a ball. Some lady looks at him strangely. He has seen her before. She rode with him on the streetcar. And yesterday, too. He can't go on like this, it's time to make a choice. The next stop is Fahlu, the linoleum salesman gets off. He turns under the bridge and looks at the willow tree of his lust. He can't take it anymore. Tiny icicles melt on the willow branches, the Linoleum Seller's breath warms them. Drip-drop. The sun glistens in a drop of water, and on the other side of the willow bush, visions pass. Four in a row. The smallest one chirps nonstop. Chirping, chirping, chirping. This is the most beautiful moment in Linoleum Salesman's life. He wants them. Then he'll get it over with. He will kill himself and rid the world of the Linoleum Seller. But first it's them.
   
    *****
   
    The smell of heart-drops makes me sick. Jesper rubbed his neck, nervously adjusting his tie in the neckline of his sweater. It seems as if all those joint ointments had somehow ended up on his skin. I don't know why anyone would cling to life like that. White lace curtains are tied on both sides of the window, something moving along the walls of the room pretending to be Direk Trentmöller's room. Shadows of branches on the floral pattern of the wallpaper. Occasionally a motor-car rumbles past, and in the headlights the shadows come to life and move into the twilight. In the yellow light of a table lamp. Layers of flowers and tree branches glide over each other. Death is a word so rarely heard in the boys' conversations that it seems as if it doesn't even exist. Everyone just disappears, goes away.
    Then, when the time comes, Jesper steps out into the December cold. The light of the cube house is far behind him, the ski trails leading him to the edge of town. Snow-covered uncultivated fields stretch out there, and Jesper walks through them to where a wall of trees darkens. Zig-zag dröm, spruce paws stroking his white coat. The dark forest, the dark green of his eyes. In the cold air, like chimes, the girls' voices ring, they wait... under the eternal ice, in an ecosystem untouched for millions of years; deep in the Lungs of the Grad, where no man should set foot. Jesper will tell no one about this.
    The shelves in Direk's room, or rather room, are filled with all sorts of junk. On a small bookshelf are framed family photos. The glass gleams. Jesper doesn't dare look at the pictures. Daughters, nieces? Do these nurses ever clean up around here? A silver icon of Dolores Dei hangs over the bed, and under the icon, folding his wrinkled hands in his lap, sits Direk Trentmöller, wrapped in a plaid plaid. A tiny silver cross gleams around his neck. By the headboard is a drip stand.
    "You know, guys, my memory... I won't recognize you tomorrow. It's the best thing that ever happened to me. It's a blessing - for someone like me. Sometimes I wake up and I can't even remember my own name. Can't remember who I am. Let alone things like that..."
    Teresh stands in front of the curtains with his hands behind his back and scrutinizes the window frames.
    "Well, you're looking pretty good right now. - He turns around. - Who showed you the drawing? Annie-Elene Lund's back. Who was that?"
    "Jesus..."-Mr. Trentmöller shakes his head, his liver-spotted face at once looking tired-"I don't remember any more of that. I don't even remember what I wish I could remember. I don't remember my son. And you talk about such things..."
    "You're wasting my time, Direk," Teresh takes a seat in front of the old man and places his hands in his lap. Khan watches in horror as Agent Macheek drills his gaze into Direk's cloudy eyes. - Now try to remember: you told your cellmate, Vidkun Hird-you would not claim that you do not remember Vidkun Hird, would you? How can you forget? You told him-" Teresh takes the old man by the chin and turns him around to face him. - Do you hear me? In prison you told Vidkun Hird that you knew the man who kidnapped the Lund sisters from Charlotteyal Beach twenty years ago. As proof, you drew him the birthmarks of one of the girls. Direk, the drawing matches!"
    Tears roll down Mr. Trentmöller's cheeks.
    "Direk! Hey! The drawing matches!"
    "I dated... I went to the park... I don't remember, I don't want to..."
    Direk whines senilely, but Teresh gets angrier and angrier. His upper lip lifts, exposing his smoked teeth. The director recoils, as if he's seen a ghost, but Teresh manages to cover the emergency call button with his palm:
    "If you're talking about memory problems, that's no problem for the International Police Force! We now have one machine. Like an ice cream scoop, Direk. With it I can get everything I need right out of your head, and this..."
    "Teresh!" - Khan gets up from his chair and takes him by the shoulder.
    "... It will be a real blessing!"
    "Teresh, don't start!"
    Jesper understands nothing. He watches in confusion as the agent looms over Direk, blocking the call button with his hand. Han shakes him angrily by the shoulder:
    "You know it will ruin you, Teresh, you know it yourself. We need someone on the International Police Force. You can't get fired. I've got something too, we don't have to-"
    Teresh calms down.
    "Okay. Jesper, the door."
    Jesper looks out into the empty hallway. The nursing home is quiet in the evening, as if abandoned. He closes the door. With his heart racing, the man leans his back against the wall and nervously ruffles his blond hair. The air in the room seems thick, and Jesper sees the old man shaking on the bed, his hands covering his face from Teresh.
    "Linoleum salesman," pronounces the agent of the International Police Force.
    The old man's sad, wrinkled eyes rounded and his eyebrows crept upward.
    "Who?"
    "Linoleum salesman. Your friend. The man who drew this. The one who told you about the girls. Who's that? Who, Direk!?"
    "He... he's just..." Direk doesn't whimper anymore. Tears dry on his cheeks. The plaid-wrapped old man collapses on the bed as if struck by lightning. - Just a Linoleum Salesman, that's all. That's the way they used to call themselves. They called themselves by their occupations. A pained sigh escapes his lips: "God help me..."
    It's quiet inside, a lone motocarriage whizzes by outside the window, and shadows of trees run across Jesper standing by the door. Han gently pushes Teresh aside.
    "Thank you, Direk. You see, everything is fine." - He looks at the old man under the plaid with his big almond-shaped eyes. - "You'll help us find these girls, won't you?"
    "Two seats," whispers Teresh to Khan.
    "Two places, Director. Name two places where this man had been. Where he lived, in what neighborhood. Do you know?"
    "In Kegsholm, they were all from Kegsholm."
    "Very good. Very good. Now one more place. Think, Direk, think where else the linoleum man has been. Help us find the girls. Where did he go?"
    "He was following them...on the beach. From the hotel."
    "Havsenglar?" - Teresh paces nervously in front of the window.
    "Please, I don't remember..."
    "Got it," Teresh nods and takes two steps toward the door. - "Havsenglar. Let's go!"
   
    *****
   
    Eighteen years ago. Vidkun Heard sits at a makeshift desk in the corner of the cell, a lock of hair stuck to his forehead, slicked back in an old-fashioned way, a hairstyle that can still be called "classic. Vidkun is still young. Relatively. His forehead is not yet creased, and his cheeks are just beginning to sag with Nordic bumps. There's a pile of handwritten sheets on the table. Philosophy of the future, a historical, eugenic universal theory. It explains everything that happens in the world; it is the legacy it will leave to humanity.
    "Vidkun Hird: Vidkun Hird," the cover reads in bold letters. There are two folding bunks on the walls, and daylight enters the cell through a small window under the ceiling.
    On one of the beds lies Director Trentmöller. An old man. And a bit distracted. He takes a silver cross off his neck, looks at it for a moment, and then suddenly starts laughing.
    "Oh! You're going to love this! I think there's something superhuman about this story, too. Adventure, science, and it's all beyond good and evil, no doubt."
    Just a feast of the soul! Direk speaks, and Vidkun takes notes. Nods businesslike. He asks me to wait a minute and picks up a new can of ink. A beam of light from the window creeps across the floor and climbs onto the steel door. It gets dark, and Vidkun lights the desk lamp. He picks up the scribbled sheet in front of him and blows on it.
    Glorious, glorious times.
    Direk turns around in the middle of the cell and comes closer to Vidkun:
    "You know what else he told me? The linoleum salesman. I'll never forget it! He did a "brilliant surgical experiment" on them. He "put them together." The youngest one died. The others survived. That's the way it is."
   
    *****
   
    Linoleum Salesman. Linoleum salesman. The linoleum salesman reaches for the toilet paper. Salt sea air enters the room at the Havsenglar from outside - from the balcony, where a telescope is mounted on a mat. A special camera is attached to the telescope. The linoleum salesman goes outside and wanders around.
    He reads the schedule at the stop pavilion. But the last streetcar has already left for town. And has taken the girls away. The warmth of the summer evening fills the man's heart with tenderness. He takes off his sandals. He steps barefoot on the warm asphalt. The asphalt is light and rough. The streetcar tracks are cool. It's an evening Charlotteian. A man loves him. He loves the girls. He loves the beach, where everything else no longer matters. He's in love. That will never happen to me, he thought in the polar village, where the northern lights snake in the sky. Couples in greenhouses. The snowfall behind the glass. It will never happen to the Linoleum Salesman. But he loves this beach. And those girls. All of them together. Especially all of them together. And one by one, too.
    Sand under my bare feet. Between my toes. Heated from the day. And then wet. He walks along the surf line, music coming from the gardens, house windows glowing in the distance between the pines. He walks on, under the bluff where no one can see him. The rocks under his bare feet are cool and slippery from the water. Where are his shoes? He can't remember. He treads the rocks beneath the cliff, the waves splashing against his pants with arrows. In the soft twilight he kneels and laughs. The pines rustle. Swim! He slides down the rocks into the water, and no one can see how happy he is. His pants are wet, he slips and bruises his knee. So what! The water is dark and warm, and the sky is dotted with stars.
   
    *****
   
    "To Telefunken!" snapped Jesper's fingers. - It's not far, and I know people there. You can call from there as much as you like, Teresh. Work your magic," he raises his hand again as the three of them try to hail a cab on Lovisa's only highway. The coaches whiz by and pull into an overpass further down the road. On the other side of the highway is a wall of trees, not many cars in the evenings. - It's half past ten, we're on time."
    Khan has trouble catching up with the others.
    "I don't know... Why are we in such a hurry. Let's talk it over first."
    "What's there to discuss, we have to call and find out. We can still make it today. - Teresh, like Jesper, is exhausted by the proximity of the target: he votes even for those cabs that don't have a yellow sign lit. - You can't wait much longer. Aren't you sick of it yourself yet?"
    "That's right. Personally, I'm done. - Jesper jumps up on one leg. A passing carriage splattered him with mud.-If you think I care what horrible, ruinous, as Han dramatically put it, devices you, Teresh, use, I don't care. You're doing your job, and you don't have time. Three days is the time in which the chance of finding someone alive, especially a child, is halved every day, every day. One hundred, fifty, twenty-five percent, Han. What would you do in a situation like that?"
    "It doesn't matter! Shit!" the rain in the lower atmosphere quietly turns to fall mud underfoot. Han barely manages to dodge the fountain of mud from under the wheels. - I don't give a damn about the cab, it stops right across the street. Jesper, you don't understand anything, you don't understand how it works! Fucking meskin... lysergine..."
    "Gotcha! Gotcha!" - Jesper runs after the cab pulling up on the side of the road and, looking around, shouts: "And what would you do without them, playing 'good cop'?"
    "Look, enough already..." - Teresh grumbled, settling down by the window in the leather-smelling seat.
    Khan piles into the cabin and puffs:
    "Jesper, you don't seem to... you don't understand... this thing... it's illegal. In all the countries that have signed the Declaration... By the way, these are the very countries where the International Police have these, well..."
    "Authority," Teresh finishes for him, and says into the driver's cab grille: "Telefunken.
    It gets quiet in the cabin for a moment. The carriage rushes off. The mud smacks under the wheels. Jesper tries to find an argument, but then Teresh confesses:
    "Yes. I used the machine on Hird. That's what I decided. He would never - never - tell us anything. He'd just sit there and sneer. He'd spend two hours telling me about the Goiko and Kiptian crossbreeding, that's all."
    "Teresh," I hear a whiny tone in Khan's voice, "you're going to get fired!"
    "Everything is under control. And you know what? I don't want to talk about it anymore."
   
    *****
   
    The next day. The warm summer rain sparkles in the Linoleum Salesman's spyglass. The image shudders as he adjusts his tripod, and then levels out - clear, crisp. The Linoleum Salesman's ears ring. The sun shines through the clouds, rain pours down on the hotel balcony. A wet streak has sprawled over more than half the cane mat. The rain rustles on the beach below, but in his head he hears the drops drumming merrily on the beach umbrella. The white, red-flowered beach umbrella in the eye of the telescope. It's almost a mile away, on a bluff, but the Linoleum Salesman reaches out into the rain. And touches it. Stand back, fat man. The linoleum salesman bought a women's magazine in town. On the cover was a fashionably dressed Ann-Margret Lund, a woman politician. And inside were pictures. Ann-Margret in her beautiful apartment. And next to her, on a coffee-colored couch, her four daughters. Underneath the picture are the names and ages written in a line.
    Annie-Elene...
    What stories he didn't make up the day he first saw them. Terrible things. All the things he would do to them. The linoleum salesman is a doctor, he's a doctor. Doctor Linoleum Salesman. And he tells them to do this. Walk in front of him. And even that could not satiate him. How his insatiable nerves blazed then, those nerves wanted to eat them alive. And how it all suddenly receded when he found himself here. What a place! They were chatting, sitting on two opposite seats of the streetcar. Right behind him. And the Linoleum Salesman could smell their blond, fair hair. The streetcar rolled down the slope, and the horses shifted to a trot. The beach itself came to him, not the other way around. It was the four of them who brought the beach to him. Dust hung over the pavement, reeds swayed, and the sun shone in the pale blue sky. It wasn't like the other beaches in Arda or here in Vaasa, in Östermalm, where the linoleum salesman was sweating. Where he fidgeted among the ugly, walrus-like bodies, chasing little walruses with his eyes. It was nothing like the pool in Jelinka, where the Linoleum Salesman's eyes turned red from the chlorinated water, and he had to wait two hours to get out of the pool.
    The wind ruffled his hair. What an expanse! The whole world could fit in here. The wind was blowing; he had rented a room on the top floor of the hotel so that the wind would blow in and cool the Linoleum Salesman down.
    He looked at them fondly, hesitating to go down to the beach. To approach them. He would burn to the ground if he touched them. He was taking pictures. Photons traveled, the same light that covered the girl's tan back, reflected off her moles and burned marks on the charcoal-black negative. White dots, like stars in the night sky. A memory stamina. He threw a noose around her neck, a noose made of a sheet, and began to masturbate. For the last time. The sheet trembled with his breath, and along with his semen, the Linoleum Salesman left his body. And disappeared.
    The memory of the Linoleum Seller and all he has seen fades day by day. The drops hit the umbrella, and Annie reaches out for the rain strings. Waking up this morning, He no longer remembered the Linoleum Salesman. He had seen a family photo in the photo shop, and the little walrus reminded him of him. He still remembered the Linoleum Salesman after that, but less and less often. Annie twists her head in the rain, her white braid bouncing down her back. And through the telescope the only one looking at her is Him.
   
    *****
   
    Thousands of kilometers away, twenty years and two months away, on the other side of the Winter Orbit, the Rodionov, a meteorological research vessel, stands captive in ice. It is half past twelve on a polar night. In the spotlight in front of the ship lies the Northern Isthmus, an icy shadow. People in overcoats are rushing around on deck, their silvery gray collars up to their fur hats. The crew is in a panic. Where the darkness seems to cloud over, and the perspective goes endlessly into the distance - without the slightest sense of the horizon - Greyness begins. People feel and fear it, although at night at a distance of more than a hundred meters it is impossible to see anything. The antenna unit of the research vessel sends a desperate distress signal to the air along with the readings of the measuring instruments. The relay station in the Catlin area of Graad receives this radio signal, distorted by the monstrous curved mirror of the approaching Grayslide: "Sestor-Oreol-Sestor, Sestor-Oreol-Sestor..."
    There is a crackling sound, and the ice sheet curves toward the sky under the gray stream; the howl of the squall wind is like music turned backwards and slowed down tenfold. The grayness approaches - an avalanche of the world's memories - and buries matter beneath it, inexorably and greedily. The clear night sky, star after star, disappears behind its rolling crest.
    In orbit, the Ikonile communications satellite watches as, off the coast of Katla, Greyness covers the entire Northern Isthmus in one wave. Samarsk sinks, the stony desert in South Samara, Isola Mundi loses half of Supramundi. Greyness gathers in rings, slowly gaining strength to revolt against matter. The centers of its cyclones open their bottomless yawns. "Azimuth on the edge of the stratosphere records the changes. The immediate zone of entroponic catastrophe already includes Lemminkyase, the Nad-Umaisky taiga reserve in the northeast of Samara, the Yekokataa irrigation network and Severnaya Zemlya in Graada, and the Semeninski Islands in the Great Blue. The remote, desolate corners of the material world. The twenty-ninth of September in the early seventies. Two nights ago there was a reunion of classmates. It is now the end of the world.
   
    And two hours ago, in the panoramic Telefunken restaurant, Teresh Maciek had placed a telephone on the table and demanded that the secretary at the Hausenglar Hotel read him the entire guest list for June and July of the fifty-second year. The table was littered with food. The phone was half-hidden under the lobster claws. Han really liked the lobsters, and Jesper explains to him how to suck the meat out of the claws along with the juice.
    "Wonderful, wonderful," Jesper says and gestures to the waiter to pick up the appetizer plates. Tonight they dine like Jesper. And at Jesper's expense. And Jesper likes to eat well. He doesn't go from rice to pasta.
    Khan sucks the claw:
    "Well, I don't know, it's clear that it tastes better, but you can also add dumplings to rice and pasta..."
    Jesper takes a sip of ice water.
    "Teresh, I can take over Kegsholm. I designed an apartment there for a pediatrician, and he knows the developer. I think he should have access to-what do you call it..."
    "The tenant registry," Teresh says. His shoulder is aching with tension. Really, the South Graadian red is so good here, it's just a sin not to drink it. Then he puts the phone back on his shoulder. The receptionist had already hung up on him once. Then Teresh called the administration and asked them to tell him, "The deaths of four little girls will be on your conscience. It worked. Khan holds an open notebook in front of him, next to his glass of wine: on the pages, undulating with notes, are more than two thousand names.
    "There's half left, only two thousand." - His head crackled with Lars, buzzed with Bergs, Oke flashed before his eyes like the lights of a train.
    "Okay," Jesper unwraps a napkin folded into a perfect cone and wipes his mouth, "it's half past twelve. We've got an hour and a half. Then the restaurant closes. I can bargain for two and a half. All right. I guess I'll take the roster of tenants." The waiter brings another phone to the table. The other guests watch this trio dine with restrained curiosity. The skinny goyko, for the second hour in a row, has been monotonously reciting names and writing them down in a book. A full, dark-skinned man in a Perseus Black shirt with a double-buttoned collar raises his glasses, breaks open a lobster claw, and then waves to the lady in the hat at the table across from him. The notebook he was holding immediately closes, and Teresch is confused by the pages.
    "Ugh, Han, your job couldn't be easier. Why don't you take it!"
    "Teresh, for God's sake, let's take this notebook."
    "No. Everything has to be in this book."
    "What's so special about her?"
    "Direktor Trentmöller," says Teresh in his old mechanical voice. And then he looks at Khan with his eyes wide open: "Director Trentmöller! Hello! Are you sure? Do you have any notes on him?"
    "Vacation.
    "Anythingelse?"
    "Linoleum salesman," the receptionist on the other end of the phone line says tiredly.
    "Direk damn it, Trentmöller, seventeenth to twenty-fourth of June. Linoleum salesman."
    Jesper bangs his fist on the table he designed himself five years ago.
    Khan puts a lobster claw on a plate:
    "Now it's time for ZA/UM.
   
    Direk Trentmöller dreams of the Linoleum Salesman. Everything the Linoleum Salesman saw swirls before his eyes, like a homogeneous mass of flesh and darkness. Sometimes he wakes up. And he cannot sleep. Then the swirl of flesh and darkness returns, Direk falls asleep. In Direk's dream, the Linoleum Salesman is his lover. Another man. Through the formless memory comes a clicking sound. The creak of a wooden window. The rattling of the glass in the frames. Then a thud, and Direk awakens.
    Death. It must be death. Dark brown flowers on the wallpaper. The shadows from the branches move and the curtains flutter in the wind. Yes, it's just as Direk had always imagined. A long thin figure took off his gray herringbone coat in front of the open window. Someone else is there! A fat death in a hat climbs down from the window sill to the floor and whispers: "Okay, I'm in. See if it's clear."
    Long Death walks over to the bed and turns off the call button. Fat Death lights a table lamp and walks over to Dirk and runs his hand affectionately through his hair. Those big dark brown eyes seem familiar.
    "Director. Don't worry. We need something from you. We want you to remember something, and to do that we're going to give you a shot. It won't hurt. It'll be like a dream."
    Direk hears the click of a suitcase lock, and a long death clamps a leather-gloved hand over his mouth. He smells something strange, everything is blurred, and kind dark brown eyes look at him.
    "What if he really doesn't remember? How would that work then?"
    "We'll see."
   
    Director Trentmöller opens himself up to Teresh. And now Teresh becomes a nightmare on the border of dreams and dreams. A tiger strolling along the water's edge. He is always there, always on guard. Wherever Direk is, the tiger follows him, sniffs and finds the Linoleum Salesman. He stalks him in Norrköping, a town in the Ardish Fjords, on the magnetic train, in the polar village of Jelinka, and in every dark nook where the Linoleum Seller enters, his eyes shine with luminescence. He hides in a basement with a low ceiling and concrete walls, where the Linoleum Salesman makes faces at his niece. When he finally makes it to Vaasa, the tiger is waiting for him at the magnet station, licking his paws, sitting at the end of the platform, where the streetlights can't reach. The tiger rustles the alder tree in the park, and the Linoleum Salesman shudders with fear. As he strolls through the streets of Lovisa on a spring morning, with a hole cut with scissors in his pants pocket, the heart of the tiger suddenly opens before him. There, inside, he sees a schoolyard, boys fighting.
    When the Linoleum Salesman arrives in Charlotteville, Teresh hovers above him in a rising stream, he is a bird of prey, he observes. He has eagle eyes, he sees everything. Finally one night he sees the Linoleum Salesman disappear into a hotel room on the top floor of the Havsenglar. Half the people who were there are gone. Day by day the Linoleum Salesman forgets he exists. Until, finally, only the decrepit, feeble-minded Direk Trentmöller remains.
    "Linoleum, linoleum, linoleum..." he mutters, "is there even such a word, 'linoleum'?" It's a strange, strange sense of loss. But it's not because of linoleum. The linoleum salesman mourns for himself, sometimes reminiscing and imagining a life in which he did not disappear. He tells obscenities and reads Vidkun Hird's memoirs. He indulges in habitual fantasies. Director Trentmöller longs for something else entirely.
    Twenty-ninth of August twenty years ago, he didn't feel well. Something terrible had happened, he could not sleep all night, the morning paper was left lying on the bathroom floor. The Secretary of Education's four daughters are missing. Director Trentmöller can't breathe, his world is broken, time has gone off the rails. In the light of a red lamp, an amateur photographer looks at photographs taken from the hotel balcony. His hands are shaking; he could have sworn they were there. He's sure of it. But there are pictures hanging on clotheslines on clothespins, and on each of them is a horror vacui. Nothing.
    The outlines of a cliff appear on the photographic paper floating in the developer tank. A pale summer sky. But they are not there.
   
    Han and Jesper drag Teresh to the cab, who comes to and goes out again. His boots are scraping the ground, he is shaking. Jesper's voice distorts as if in a crooked mirror. Jesper... Jesper's a great guy, after all.
    "Teresh, Teresh! Don't sleep. What shall we do with you?"
    "He didn't do it. It wasn't him."
    "Okay, what should we do with you, take you to the hospital? Teresh!"
    Teresh's voice is barely audible:
    "What to do now?"
    "I don't know, you tell me! Should I take you to the hospital, or will you sleep it off?"
    Teresh tries to get to his feet.
    "No, you don't get it. It's a dead end. I'm sorry... I don't know what to do next."
    Han holds Teresh's head as the two of them get him into a cab.
    "Hold on, tiger. First you'll sleep it off. I'll take it from here. I have a plan."
    Teresh loses consciousness. Everything disappears.
   

▲
9.DIVINE AND SCARY SCENT
⬍
    9.DIVINE AND SCARY SCENT
    What divine and fearful and mysterious fragrance hung in the air then? My name is Ambrosius St. Miro, the suru say "Ambrosius Puja-mira," and the Graads call me Svyatamir. "Diduška?" they ask with eyes opened with adoration, but I answer them, "No. I am not your diduška. I am Ambrosio Santa Mira in Mesca, Ambrosios Aguamira by the Cypresses, I am ambrosia, holy peace. You have chosen me, endowed me with power over your life, your views, the closet where you keep your thoughts. The ones you ponder before you go to sleep and the next morning, at the window on public transportation. But what I do is no longer negotiable, no argument needed here, no side to take. The time for doubt is over.
    I can appear at any time, and my arrival marks the change of eras. It is a great blessing to live at the same time as me. I am infallible, and so are you now. Your decision can be right or wrong. My decision is what is meant to be. At a time when the idea of God still seemed interesting to you, I was Pius of Pericarnassus; I was Erno Pasternak when you wanted to be betrayed and sacrificed. I made you sing parsnips to me. Praise for my cruelty and my senseless war. Because you wanted to hate me. I was Franconegro; you were nationalists, you wanted a world currency with black banknotes and militarism. You wanted to work in factories and serve God. And medieval-industrial-style architecture, to live under concrete vaults. I was a woman, Dolores Dei, when you thought you needed a mother, a perfect mother. I had beautiful breasts, I was young, and so were you, you wanted to fall in love with me, and I let you. You wanted humanity, new hope, concern for your neighbor. I put you in school and taught you languages. You got tired of me, and I died. You wanted a world without me. And I became Saul's light to you, the indifferent girl who sat back and watched you do coups. "Ah, well, then do what you want, make mistakes, and learn nothing," I thought.
    I was a philistine. I traveled from country to country, visiting one insel after another and introducing you to my ideas. Wherever I went, I infected you with defeatism and nihilism. I told you on the radio that everything in the world is wrong and doesn't matter, everything is egal, pohui, who cares? Presidents, kings, princes, and sheiks all feared me and wouldn't let me into their suzerainty. They didn't want to see me in publishers, or on movie screens, or on talk shows. But then I started signing autographs in bookstores, and that's when they understood! I was drawing crowds. I was on the radio, and the ratings were going up. I was incredibly popular. And I thank you for making me happy. They invited me on their talk show, and I showed what kind of thinking a man is capable of. Look how right you can be. And how witty, too: listening to me, you couldn't stop laughing. You called the whole family to the radio, and you all heard together how special you really are: "I could have had a girlfriend-supermodel, too," I said, "but I chose solitude. That would've been beauvaisant. Dear supermodel, I certainly could have spent the night with you. We'd have a good time, you'd be as numb as a pillow, and I'd squirt milk up your ass and watch it come out. Of course, I thought about it. But it wouldn't be me anymore. It would go against everything I believe in.
    But it's just a show. That's not why you chose me. I was the only one who asked: what was that divine and terrifying aroma hanging in the air then? I'm not weak and arrogant enough to tell you what it was. I will not pretend to know what to you is horror and beauty. It is the mystery of your heart. But so be it - I'll let you peek into the end of the story. I will tear this world apart, peeling it layer by layer. This time it's not empty words, it's not a figure of speech: it's real politics. I'm going to attack. On Revashol, on Grad, and beyond. There will be no end to it. I will open front after front. And when all those who have not joined me are dead, and Greyness has swallowed up the whole world, graciously! These are the terminals where you can end your life. You can leave whenever and however you want, it doesn't matter. I'm evacuating the whole world. We will live in the past. You'll be there again-at the clinic, on a park bench! You're together again, standing outside the front door talking, and it's raining again. Here are your friends walking across the square in the snow-covered city, and their collars are just as up. All that's left of this world is a memory, an entroponic catastrophe.
    You could never say for sure what it was. Even when your gaze was turned inward, straight to your head-you couldn't tell. Ghostly, it slipped away into all those long-vanished places, into irreversibility. I'll give it to you right in your hands, it will fragrant in your palms, divine and terrifying, and you can finally press your face against it. The grayness is poured with color, it oozes from the gaps; I open the blinds, and at intermediate frequencies all the lost colors of the past show up, all the horror. Everything comes back.
    This is what nihilism leads to. It is no longer what could be, or what could not be. It is what it is.
    The whole world is an immediate zone of entroponic catastrophe.

▲
10. GOOD NIGHT, ANNIE
⬍
10. GOOD NIGHT, ANNIE
    When Jesper returns to his country house, the light inside is off. He walks inside without turning on the lights, his eyes adjusting, the outline of the furniture slowly emerging from the darkness. He doesn't even take his shoes off. The house is quiet and clean; the huge, half-wall window has recently been cleaned. Teresh's sleeping place has been cleaned, too. The vomit basin is gone, the parquet is shiny. Dirt from Jesper's winter boots soaks into the sheep's wool rug. Jesper walks over to the bookcase that separates the sleeping nook from the living room and stops. He looks at the packages from the boutiques: Ozonne, En Provence, Tea Shop. It smells like green tea. On a rack next to the rack hangs a tiny silver dress. The fabric sparkles in the dark.
    Stretching his arms out in front of him, the man slips behind the curtains into the bedroom. The dim night light from the corner window falls on the bed. In bed, spreading her blond hair across the black pillow, sleeps Jesper's girlfriend, the model Anita. A shadow runs down the girl's body, peeking out from under the covers, her ribs curving, a single birthmark on her chest. Jesper watches the girl's chest heave. He tries to remember. Four years. They've been together for four years. What is she now, nineteen? Jesper is thirty-four.
    "Hey, wake up!"
    The girl whimpers through her sleep like a child. Jesper blows into her ear, a strand of blond hair scattered by his breath:
    "Annie, ooooh, wake up, Jesper's here!"
    "Mm-mm... Jesper, let's sleep," the girl pulls the edge of the blanket under her chin. - It's so nice and fresh in here..."
    "Look, I can't, I have to go."
    "Going...where?"
    "Wake up, let's talk. Do you want me to make you some tea or something?"
    "I brought you tea, did you see?" - The mixed-Vaasi-Oran model turns on his side, joints sliding under the blanket, black shadow waves rolling across his sea surface.
    "Yes, I saw, thank you very much - you are very thoughtful."
    The girl's sleepy cries, stretched vowels as long as her legs:
    "We'll talk tomorrow, Jesper, let's go to sleep..."
    "I told you: I can't tomorrow, I'm leaving." Jesper looks into her eyes. Silence. The flip-flop clock rustles briefly. Outside the window, the wind howls.
    Finally, the girl snorts unhappily:
    "Phew, out in the woods again with your friends, I haven't even seen you properly. Let's stay together tomorrow. I didn't just come here, I came to see you.
    "No, you don't understand, I'm leaving today."
    "Today? What time is it?"
    The white plates with numbers click quietly.
    "It's two o'clock in the morning! Where are you going? You've been so strange lately! - The girl rises on her elbows, her mouth clenched anxiously. - I came to see you; if it weren't for you, I wouldn't have gone at all."
    "I'm very sorry. I really am. Also, I'm sorry to bother you, but if you could get out of bed for a minute, I need to move it.
    "What have you got there?"
    "The Thing.
    The girl stands on the cold floor. Rubbing one leg over the other, she watches at a loss as Jesper moves the bed. Her feet squeak across the floor, the model of mixed Vaasi-Oranian descent holds the blanket around her shoulders like a mantle. She's very pretty, but that doesn't matter anymore.
    "What are you going to do?"
    There is a pounding on the floorboards in response: Jesper kneels down.
    "Disappear."
    The lid of the stash rises, and Jesper pulls out a densely packed white suitcase.
    "And when will you come back after you've disappeared?"
    "I think the best answer I could give would sound a little cynical. So I guess I won't say anything," the zipper rattles, and Jesper pulls out a stack of documents from his suitcase, from the filing compartment.
    The girl is angry. There are Yespers she likes: Yesper the homely, tea-making Yesper, Yesper the businessman, Yesper the awkwardly sympathetic - but she doesn't like that kind of Yesper at all.
    "Please don't talk to me like I'm an idiot, you're not on an interview for Culture News!"
    "Okay," Jesper nervously twists his papers into a tube. - Remember when I told you about the Lund sisters? That I knew them, that they were missing, and so on."
    "Is it at my parents' cottage? - the girl's eyebrows are still suspiciously furrowed, but her mouth softens at the memory. - You got so drunk!"
    "See, that's why I don't drink," Jesper laughs embarrassed. But I had to be persuaded, didn't I?
    "You were so funny!"
    "Funny," Jesper says bitterly, "that's how. Okay. I was funny. Anyway, I'm going looking for them."
    "Who?"
    "Cornelius Gurdy. Who do you think?"
    The magnificent knuckle breaks at the knees: with her back against the wall, the model sits on the floor. "But you said it was pointless! You yourself said it was over. Or don't you remember what you said yourself?"
    Jesper pats the folded papers on his palm and takes a few thoughtful steps around the room, as if consulting with another Jesper-the one who got drunk at Anita's parents' summer house. A very inappropriate incident. A very inappropriate Jesper. And yet he is a thousand times smarter and a thousand times better than this useless organism. He ruffles his blond hair with a paper scroll and says:
    "There is hope."
    "Jesper..."
    "Understand, I have to," Jesper puts the property documents into the girl's folded arms on her chest. - Please stay here, take my house and live. Sell the apartments downtown, both of them. The sooner the better. Tomorrow morning the prices will start to fall. Run to my broker first thing in the morning. Here's his number..."
    The girl's shoulders shudder, but not a sound is heard, only the wind whining outside the window. Jesper squats down in front of his model, the flaps of his winter coat touching the parquet. He puts his hand on the girl's shoulder.
    "Look, I'll make tea, okay?"
    The flip-flop clock clicks: "02:30. There are steaming cups on the floor, a square sugar bowl with cubes of brown sugar and a special spoon to take them. Pouring tea in the dark isn't easy, but getting myself to turn on the lights is even harder. "02:45".
    "I don't understand. What does it all mean?" - asks the girl after a long silence, taking a sip of tea.
    "Well, what do you think?"
    "And all this time you've had this suitcase here," the girl points her finger at the suitcase in the middle of the room, "as if I'd never been here at all.
    "I put it together long before you did."
    "And what, I'm supposed to change your mind?"
    "Well, you can try."
    "Try it? You know what I think about it? - The model angrily puts the cup on the floor. - I think this story about the Lund sisters is complete nonsense. You're just a pedophile."
    A sneaky blow. Jesper's shocked look is unforgettable. The girl herself is horrified by the force of her words. For a moment, and only for that moment, she regrets them.
    "Okay.
    Without waiting for her to speak, the man gets up. He takes his suitcase and quietly walks out behind the curtains. Anger overcomes Anita again, and the model, naked and furious, rushes after Jesper into the living room.
    "You can shove your cube up your ass! I'm not going to sit in that stinkin' Katla!"
    A stack of white sheets flies from her hands across the dark room, one by one they land on the beautifully textured wooden table, on the herringbone parquet. Jesper doesn't even turn around, just stops and bows his head:
    "What are you going to do? Go to Grad to work in a munitions factory?"
    "You're miserable! You and those girls of yours, it's all just pathetic. And I was warned! I knew everything, even before the cottage! Everybody knows that! But I was only fifteen at the time, I was such a fool-" Anita leans her hand on the kitchen counter to catch her breath. - Annie this and Annie that. My name is not Annie!"
    Jesper feels his hands grow cold. The word "abnormal" pops up and begins to swirl around in his head. He remembers himself and the young model as they cuddle, dozens and hundreds of times in a row: "Good night, Annie. Good night, Annie. Good night." Such happiness. He falls asleep, the tree branches quietly knocking on the window like a second chance. Why be sad? Everything is just as you dreamed it would be!
    The model runs back into the bedroom and yells from there in a sudden fit of anger, "Good night, Annie!"
    The human brain is inherently conscientious. At first it refuses to consider such a nightmarish coincidence possible. But the clearer the difference between what the mind says and what the voice mockingly shouts out of the room, the more Jesper's breathing slows. It's as if his body is about to pass out, unable to withstand the shame. He picks up the papers from the floor, sheet by sheet, and smooths them out on his knee. He picks up the words, not yet knowing exactly who he wants to use them against. Rather, against the world. He returns to the bedroom, places the papers on the bedside table, and pulls out his awful trump card.
    "So what do you intend to do, go back to Revashol? That's not a good idea right now. You see, he's gone."
    The girl sits on the bed and pulls on her evening gown in childish anger, not yet understanding what it is about.
    "This town no longer exists," Jesper repeats, and the girl rises to her feet in horror.
    "What do you mean?"
    "You know there's been no communication with them for five days?"
    "I don't know! Connections to who?"
    "With Revashol. It was bombed. Completely. But you don't like to read the papers!"
    "You're kidding, right?"
    Blinded by the lust for revenge, Jesper does not yet realize what he is doing wrong. And when he does, it's too late. The girl gasps for air in a panic, her hands shaking. Her fingernails clack on the buttons, and the scale of the radio lights up yellow in the darkness. The wheel spins under her fingers, the airwaves howling and wheezing through the speakers as the arrow on the scale slides through the shortwave frequencies. Mixed in a heap of foreign channels professionally recount the news in an alarming tone. The model's cosmopolitan mind snatches only horrible passages from them: "the Meskian aggressor," "St. Miro," "Revachol," "atomic weapons," and "half the population." The girl trembles so violently that Jesper becomes fearful for her health. It seems that this delicate mechanism is about to fall apart. Finally, the radio host from Vaasa strikes her one last blow. She collapses to the floor as the announcer's voice breaks through the list of passengers provided by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs - the kind that only real events are spoken about: "...the famous singer Pernilla Lundquist is recording her third studio album...".
    Anita's large eyes, wide open with horror, darken in the semi-darkness of the room. She sobs:
    "My God! My sister! My sister's in there!"
    "I'm sorry," Jesper pronounces.
    "Are you sure you know? How do they know!? Why aren't they doing anything?"
    "I don't know," Jesper picks up the suitcase.
    The girl breathes like a hunted horse. Her mouth curves in a monstrous black scream. That mouth threatens to swallow up the whole world. Perhaps it does, because Jesper remembers nothing further. In the vacuum of the scream, the blindingly white snow swirls, the concrete of the room echoing with a piercing, "Don't go!" With bruised nails on his wrist, Jesper slams the door behind him and steps out into the courtyard. There is a blizzard outside. It's cold, the wind whistles, but his skin burns. Picking up a handful of snow, he rubs his face with it. At the edge of the yard, at the mouth of a tunnel of fir trees, stands a black motor-car. Terez Maciek comes out of the lighted interior and waves to him. Jesper, with his coat flapping in the wind and a white suitcase in his hand, walks across the courtyard toward him. Ahead of him, a snowy wind sways the firs, zig-zag dröm. Suddenly the world is so simple, as if all the meanings have just disappeared. It is no longer worthwhile. Jesper smiles.
    The cab is warm. The car rocks as he falls into the seat next to Han. Teresh closes the door and leans toward him.
    "How did it go?"
    "Well, let's just say not very well," Jesper replies, pulling himself together for a moment. - Let's go."
   
    Monday night, seven days ago.
    The city in the cab window explodes with lights like a disco, Teresh is shivering and delirious. Jesper holds him tightly:
    "Look, he seems to be cramping. It's not good. We've got to get him to the hospital.
    "Teresh, can you hear me? - Han shouts, leaning over his friend. - Now we're going to take you to the hospital."
    "No!" Teresh grabs Han by the jacket. - Please! - Han and Jesper look at each other confusedly and shrug their shoulders. Teresh's face is covered with drops of sweat. - Promise me! Swear you won't give me up!" - his chin trembles; suddenly his eyes go glassy and his body becomes hard as wood.
    "What the hell? - Jesper shakes Teresh, puts his hand to his mouth. - Breathes. Look, I don't know, maybe we really shouldn't take him."
    "All right, we won't take him. And where to, your place?"
    Jesper sighs heavily.
    "Oh-h... Well, it's my place, then. Just one thing. The day after tomorrow, my girlfriend's coming in from Revachol - do you think she'll be okay with that?"
    Khan shakes his head sullenly:
    "How would I know. Do you know any private doctors?"
    "Private, Han? If you don't work in a clinic, you don't get a license!"
    "Yeah, but I thought maybe you knew someone-"
    "I know a regular doctor, Han. Is a regular okay?"
    "It'll fit, it'll fit, don't swear."
    The cab rushes through the nighttime Vaasa. Meanwhile Teresh becomes the Linoleum Seller, Vidkun Hird, Direk Trentmöller, and then Teresh Macheek again. But at the same time he feels as if he himself no longer exists. The riot of colors of Vaasa is blurred by the black ink of the jellyfish, the aquarium darkens. The blackest of the blacks is Teresh's suit. It is from the leaves of the trees, from the rustle of the slush under the wheels, from the sky above the city. Teresh pulls up his cuffs, adjusts the knot of his tie. He is solemn, he is polite. His suit smells dry-cleaned, and there, like umbrellas under cemetery birches, a funeral opens before him. The ones so awaited, so feared; and everyone is already there! Here is the mother of the girls, elegant mournful wrinkles under a black lace mourning veil. Carl Lund, the paper maker, holds an umbrella over her head. The leaves of the birch trees shiver in the August rain.
    Both Han and Jesper came to the funeral. Even Han's mother came, and the whole class is here, too. They are all much older now. Most of them Teresch doesn't recognize, but this must be Sixten, and this is little Olle. Von Fersen is saying something to his backup singer. Here comes Ziggy! The baddest boy in school, as always, in a black leather jacket. And Jesper has the only white umbrella. Teresh walks between groups of mourners; everyone is talking quietly, patting each other on the shoulders sympathetically. When Teresh passes, they nod respectfully. And the girls are there, too, under the piles of flowers, in the soft, fluffy earth. They are now skulls, sets of phalanges, vertebrae, rib arches, curved clavicles, stacked in rows like relics. Nothing is lost, everything is in place, carefully preserved. The reports are as clear as a textbook, it's a forensic magnum opus, it will be studied at the Academy. Here's a scattering of teeth: May's little baby teeth, Annie's pearls, Moline's wicked sharp fangs - everything is in place, everything matches: every filling, a chip from a fall from a bicycle on Annie's molar. And Charlotte's movie star smile. It makes me want to keep a few of them! Just as a memento. How they would click in the palm of my hand - like precious rosaries! But you can not. It would be unprofessional.
    A doctor comes in and puts on a saline drip. Monday. Tuesday night. Teresh comes to himself little by little; it is cold, everything is gray and silvery green in the wake. Next to the frosted aronia bushes is a set table, old-fashioned carved crystal with fruit motifs. Silence. Only something hisses in the bushes, like a radio. Waking up, Teresh realizes what it was. The news of the destruction of the North Isthmus has stirred the public, and he has no desire to play the game. Teresh asks Jesper to switch to Radio Classics. They say Radio Classics will play the music of dead white men in wigs, even when the whole world comes to an end. Perouse-Mitresi is conducting; what beautiful music - like the sound of the ocean, m-mm. Everyone dances, slowly, and the more Teresch thinks about it, the clearer it becomes to him that there will be no funeral. The investigation is at a standstill. By Tuesday morning, he's ready to admit that they'll never know what happened to the Lund sisters.
    Her heels leave dents on the cab mat. The girl puts her feet up: her nails are covered in coral-red lacquer, and her Serge Van Dyck shoes have flesh-colored straps around them. At the intersection of the straps sparkles a bunch of precious stones. Would you call it elegant? Of course, if they were some tasteless rhinestones on shoes from a department store, it wouldn't be comme il faut at all! But these Serge Van Dyck shoes - the ones we're looking at right now - cost ten thousand reais. One is five hundred reais more expensive: on account of the repair. One diamond rolled down the gutter in the Delta of Revashol - what a heady night! Besides, Serge Van Dyck himself said that one should distinguish between elegance and snobbery. And since Serge is the author of these shoes... draw your own conclusions. "130 Kersfall, please. I think it's somewhere out of town?"
    Size thirty-seven feet, and what elevations! They're like oran arcades... A podologist from the Kegsholm Circle would have given them nine and a half locked basements on a ten-basement scale.
    The portable phone rings, the lid clicks open. But we're still looking at the ten-thousand-dollar Van Dykes, the way the gems flash as the foot jiggles to the beat of the Fackenhaff playing in the cab. We can't get enough of them. "Hello! Berenice, darling! Ozonne! It's so great! I've always wanted to go there! No, not for long. Just for a couple of weeks."
    The cab door closes. "Thank you." Thirteen-inch heels clatter down the walkway in the twilight; it's always either twilight or dark here, where has the day gone? White shins glisten, framing the view of a concrete cube against a backdrop of spruce trees. Inside the cube, a light burns. The lichen on the trees sparkles, the puddles are covered in thin ice: frosts, harbingers of October storms. Shoes stand in front of the door, a suitcase sinks beside them. The doorbell chirps. Jesper's girlfriend's legs are endless. Our gaze creeps along them, and it seems to never reach the edge of her flared coat. Beneath the bulge of her buttocks, the air fleet of the peacemaker from Mesque, black as tavot, appears on the horizon of Revachol. In the fashion capital, somewhere at the level of Anita's knees, they are already looking up at the sky from under her arm and asking: what is that ominous black smoke over the ocean, like thunderclouds?
    "It's open!" - Jesper shouts from behind the door. The girl enters, and the living room greets her with the smell of sweat. Tobacco sweat: a lot of sweat and tobacco. Jesper walks toward her from across the room, where he was sitting on the floor under the window. There, on the mattress, lies some unfamiliar guy, a disheveled blond head sticking out from under the blanket. The interior designer takes her suitcases and introduces her to a fat guy who sits next to a sweaty guy. The immigrant smiles awkwardly as he holds out his hand; his palm is warm and sweaty, too.
    "Anita," the girl introduces herself.
    "I am Inayat, but everyone calls me 'Khan. You can call me Khan, too. And this," he points to the body under the blanket, "is my partner Teresh Maciek. As you can see, he's not feeling well.
    Khan thinks he did a pretty good job. It could have gone worse: "Really?! Jesper, why didn't you tell me you were dating a real model? Wow! If I was dating Anita Lundquist, I would have told everyone. Can I get an autograph? Pernilla Lundquist is your sister. Give me Pernilla's number. Show me your tits. Jesper, tell her to show her tits!"
    Han spoils the relaxed beginning of the conversation by laughing at all those "boobs" in his own head. Now he involuntarily begins to peer at them under the girl's ample tunic. "Boobs, boobs, model boobs, famous model boobs," he thinks and giggles louder and louder. He doesn't even notice that this is the second time the girl has asked about Teresh.
    "Poor thing, what about him?"
    "Food poisoning," Jesper takes the girl by the hand and leads her into the bedroom to change.
    Khan decides to be tactful and shouts from the door:
    "All right, I'll see you tomorrow then!"
    "Leaving already? Wait, I'll call you a cab!"
    "Don't take a cab, I'd rather walk."
    "Bye!" - the girl shouts in a friendly voice.
    Han walks down to the bus stop along a forest path covered with moss crunching from the cold, while the girl puts on her pants on the bed. Her bohemian-style tunic is adorned with a stenciled portrait of Serge Van Dyck in a revolutionary two-tone palette: gray with turquoise. What? No, not pretentious! Van Dyck is also a kind of revolutionary. He's a fashion revolutionary. The mazes of the fashion world. Only he doesn't send the bourgeois to a settlement in the taiga on the northeastern edge of Graad, but, well, sells them clothes.
    "Jesper, who's that?"
    "What do you mean?"
    "You never told me about any Han. And about that second one?"
    "This is Teresh. So, former classmates, high school friends. We had a reunion recently. A reunion. Didn't I tell you?"
    "No."
    "Strange."
    "Yeah, it's weird."
    "Well, we just decided to remember the old days. Look, Teresh has arrived from Graad. Maybe he'll stay a few more days. You won't mind, will you?"
    "Not at all," the girl replies, but a bad feeling gnaws at her. She glares suspiciously at Jesper's back as he goes to make tea. The reception was cold. Just one absent-minded kiss. Annoyed, she wanders around the bedroom, but suddenly notices among the books on the bedside table a ring case. Oh, surprise! Is it for tonight? The box lies just far enough away for Jesper to reach it from the bed. Is it? I don't think so, but it's better to know in advance. Just curious, really! The mood immediately lifted. Black velvet box, a tiny box. The girl opens the box: click!
   
    Night falls on Vaasa. In the center of the city, in Königsmalme, a little fox runs across the crossroads. The animal's breath stains the air blue, it moves its ears. The street is quiet and deserted, the balcony baskets on the houses lined up, the yellow lights of traffic lights flashing in the mirrors of the windows. The nighttime northern metropolis is a light installation: beautiful, modern, only few visitors. The building of the Royal Architectural Museum in the style of the Didrid rises above the river; in the rays of the facade lighting it shines as if it were made of gold. Below, in the darkness, the water moves - in an icy glaze, like vodka from a freezer. Bridges curve above it with pearly strands of lanterns on their backs. Spokes whirr - a lone cyclist riding home; the smell of separation hangs in the air. Upstairs, humming, the billboards at the corners of the department store turn off to save electricity. Above the rows of pay phones, a giant model in her underwear smiles one last time and disappears. Anita Lundquist. "Little girl, cover yourself," Presidium Chairman Sapurmat Knezhinsky would tell her, "you'll catch a cold. Two International Police agents run up the porch of the police station. "Teresh Macheek! Where is Teresh Macheek? You apprehended him four days ago!" The inquirer is an Internal Affairs officer. He's an angel of death. "Teresh - how? Macheek?" The officer on duty waits at the machine for an answer. "We haven't had anyone by that name."
    The asphalt is shiny. In Salem, it's freezing at night, and the puddles are frozen over. Wooden houses slouch along the sidewalks, the sound of a lone pedestrian's footsteps echoing down the street. And somewhere down there in the basement, Inayat Khan flicks on the Harnancourt light. The room plunges into darkness as the airship, the only source of light, goes out. Each time it lights up again, Han's face emerges from the darkness. Chains of lights on the decks of the ship are reflected in the thick glasses of his diametrical glasses. An idea comes to him, a flash of the kind you only see when all the other lights go out. Khan has been waiting two years for this. He cuts the stretches, takes the airship like an infant from its glass cradle, and dances with it in his arms. An empty display case stands in the middle of the room. On the other side of the road, in the arena courtyard, the filaments in the spotlights are cooling; the carriages of the horses disappear into the gloom. Horses sleep in rows in their stalls.
    The streets of the suburbs, the whitewashed fences of the palisades, float by. Dogs barking in the distance, windows glow in the dark, and wooden garden furniture stands on the empty veranda. Who is there rustling in the gooseberry bushes? There is a chill in the night, a fear of the future creeps into the dreams of the nuclear family, and where Lovisa ends and the coniferous forest begins, Jesper de la Gardie climbs out of bed. Anita has fallen asleep angry, and Jesper is uneasy. But not because of this. Jesper can't find his precious hair band. He sneaks around the bedroom in his underwear, inspects the bedside table, the shelving unit, then throws on a robe and walks behind the curtains into the living room. The glass wall gleams in the dark, and on the floor is a minefield of milk bags, socks, and mugs turned into ashtrays: a hermit crab named Terez Maciek is setting up his new sink.
    The agent lies with his nose pressed against the glass. Jesper puts a cup of tea next to him. It smells like mint.
    "Hey! Wake up! Come on, I don't know, let's talk or something."
    "Okay, only I'll smoke in the room."
    Lips move, laughter is heard, hour after hour passes, and it begins to turn blue outside the window. Mugs with cigarette butts and tea cups slowly emerge from the darkness.
    It's a blue morning behind the windows of the Kino Café, too. Wednesday. Early birds bustle on the street in Estermalm, the sweeper rumbles, the morning papers fall into the mailboxes. The first carriages appear on the road, the driver scraping ice off the windshield.
    A mustachioed copywriter in his thirties or less is drinking coffee and eating eggs in a cafe. Suddenly he chokes on his coffee and, coughing, runs to the bathroom. On the table, he leaves the morning paper open. In the advertising column is a photocopy of a letter written in Moline Lund's handwriting. "We're doing fine. We're at the same man's, we like it here. We love you." Under the photocopy is Inayat Khan's phone number and an ad that reads, "Dear Friend, it's not too late. If you have information about this letter, if you sent this letter, or know something (anything) previously unknown about the disappearance of the Lund sisters, please call this number."
   
    "I'd like a block of Astra with menthols, please - wait, has Radar arrived yet?"
    "No. I'm sorry, Mr. Ulvi - evacuation! No more new goods are coming in, I don't know how much longer I can trade here.
    "Well, then give me three blocks of Astra," says the young man with curly brown hair. - And that blackcurrant wine over there, how many degrees is it?"
    "Now, now, let's see," the country store clerk takes a dusty bottle from the liquor shelf. - Whoo-hoo! Twenty-three, pure alcohol, I guess."
    "Great, are there more?"
    "There are two bottles here."
    "Let's have both of them. And that vodka over there, the Terminal Station, a liter-isn't that aged in Grey?"
    "Of course she is! And even if she hadn't, she would have been infused herself: there she is, Grey, already behind the mowing!"
    "Okay, another pack of matches-a pack, not a box. Are these candles all there is? Oh, yes! I'll also take some strawberry liqueur, I forgot last time. Those two bottles over there."
    "That one, the second one, the raspberry one, the strawberry one, is over."
    "Well, I'll take it, then. In fact, give me whatever's left of alcohol, since you're closing anyway. And some smoked sausage, too."
    "All alcohol?"
    "Yes, and half a stick of smoked sausage."
    A curly-haired young man rides his bicycle through the village of Lochdu - in Lemminkäis, into the immediate area of the entroponic disaster. In the trailer, dusty bottles jingle, propped up by blocks of cigarettes. And half a stick of "doctor's" smoked sausage wrapped in paper. The lanterns along the country road sparkle in the morning twilight like diamonds.
   

▲
11. ISE CHILE
⬍
11. ISE CHILE
   
    Early fifties, on a playground in Lovisa, a young mother watches her four-year-old son. It's midsummer, the poplars are dropping flakes of down, the sun is shining in the sky, and Mom is worried. Other children are scurrying around the playhouse, the boys screaming and pulling the girls' pigtails. The suspension bridge in the playhouse hums as the kids run across its planks. Downstairs, on the wooden board of the big sandbox, the girls and boys are building a town together. The blond girl drives a tiny model balloon around the tower, and the two boys dig a tunnel, one on one side and one on the other of the sandy ridge. The tunnel converges in the middle, and the boys laugh happily. The girl gets bored and starts whimpering, and the other girls come up to find out what's wrong.
    Only little Ulv sits far away, on the other side of the sandbox. And if anyone asks him about the only little house he has built on his immense property, Ulv won't say anything. The boy will just stare absent-mindedly into the distance and smile his enigmatic childish smile. As if he were... too cool for that. He's too cool a guy to tell all kinds of snotty kids about his house. Soon the kids get tired of Ulvi's arrogant mannerisms and leave him alone. The young mother doesn't understand why her child isn't interested in the company. Even with his parents, Ulv does not exchange more than ten words at a time. He talks, but only to himself when he is alone. Sometimes the mother listens to him from another room and does not understand what is wrong with her boy.
    In the distance, a parade is going on down the street, and the sound of a bass drum: Unz-unz... Ulv sits proudly alone in the corner of the sandbox, shaking his curly head back and forth to the rhythm of the music. You'd think he'd just be...
    ...chilith.
   
    *****
   
    Wednesday afternoon, the woods near Jesper's house. This time Han walks ahead, and the others try to keep up. Han is heavily caffeinated; he's been up all night. Until morning he flicked on the Harnancourt lights, made coffee and long distance calls and listened to sad songs until his mother asked him to keep it down. Han waved his arms as he spoke, his orange windbreaker unbuttoned, and a turquoise-orange-purple, Ilmaraa flag-colored striped scarf fluttering behind his back. My mother knitted it for Han for the Winter Solstice, and a hat with tassels for his last birthday. It's in Ilmaraa colors, too. It's a set.
    The forest road winds among the hills, with pine trees on either side of it. Three in a row - Jesper in the right lane, Teresh in the left, and Han in the middle on the grassy ridge between them - the friends walk down the road from the snow-covered sandy hillside. A grayish pattern of dry grass crunches beneath their boots. Single snowflakes swirl in the air, the dry autumn vegetation glistens with frost.
    Han breathes in the fresh air. It smells like stale lichen. Khan claps his hands; he has mittens on an elastic band threaded through his sleeves.
    "I've never believed in a criminal solution, and you know it. Every step forward is a step forward, and in that sense, of course, chasing linoleum salesmen is also useful, but... Teresh, sometimes I feel like you collect these guys like I collect memorabilia, you know? Not that I mean it's a bad thing..."
    Teresh blows out large rings of smoke and blows small aster rings through them, which are immediately dispersed by the breeze.
    "Nothing against it: you're right. You collect this stuff because you think it will help you find out something about the girls. I collect my zoo for the same reason."
    "And what do you collect, Jesper?" - Han asks.
    "I don't collect anything, crazy. But it's still nice when a man has a hobby. What do we do now?"
    "The idea is to search Trentmöller's house, interview his relatives..." - Teresh curls his leather-gloved fingers.
    "And how do you know that - that you saw that he didn't do it? - The forest road curves, light brown, hair-like strands of dry grass flowing down the rut and rustling under Jesper's feet. - Or aren't you sure about that?"
    "You can't be sure of anything at all in Dr. Perepiah Popcornassky's psychedelic buffoonery," interrupts the hyperactive Khan and turns around. Taking a few steps back, he explains to Teresh, "That's why the information obtained with ZA/UM doesn't count in court: it's a hallucination, you know? It's useless by itself, reality has to match. There must be some witnesses, evidence. Otherwise it makes no sense!"
    "Well, I don't agree that it didn't make any sense," Teresh tosses his butt under the trees, an orange spark bouncing off his cigarette, "but you're right about Perepi Popkornasski: there was a mixture of reality and the subject's fantasy. It seemed to me that it had to do with some... aspect of his personality. Which then ceased to exist, or... We'll have to ask the local police to investigate it - when we have time.
    "But now, as you say, basta?" - Han asks.
    "So far, yes, basta."
    "Very good, because - let's be honest! How many of you would like to find them in a ditch somewhere? I mean, really. It's not an end in itself, it's not that important!"
    Khan pauses, waiting with a sly smile for answers, and Teresh raises his hand:
    "Я. I would like to. And that's an end in itself. You know what 'completeness' is, don't you? Have you heard of such a concept?"
    Jesper still thinks contemptuously of Perepi Popkornassky and his synth-picking, the self-satisfaction of an overrated futurist.
    "Do you have something better? Tempus rev? And we'll do it right this time?"
    "It would be good. Honestly, I wouldn't mind."
    "Come on, Han, be reasonable," Teresh lights a new cigarette, the cold air smelling of matchstick sulfur. - Time is running out, there's no more contact with Revashol, no more contact with Occident. Half the world is up in the air. If war breaks out, all investigations will be suspended, documents, evidence, people could be lost. We have to act quickly, see this through before it's too late."
    The three little figures cross weedy fields, balancing on log bridges as the ice drifts beneath their feet down the stream, jumping over fallen trunks in the twilight of the forest tunnel, moving in goose bumps through whitewashed meadows. Han climbs under the barbed wire, and Jesper and Teresh jump over it. The hedges remain behind, the forest is thinning, and a sandy road furrows like a small canal in the banks of tree roots. The sea breeze already murmurs in the treetops, the air is filled with a sense of proximity to the expanse of water.
    "We've been doing it your way for so long, and it didn't work. Now let's try it my way," Han says more with his hands than with his mouth.
    "Okay, you're right about us being deadlocked," admits Teresh. - But why don't you tell us what your plan is first, and we'll think about it. If we think it'll work, fine, we'll try it your way. If not, we'll have to take a break.
    "You don't understand," Han said with a wave of his hands, "if you say no, we'll never know anything. There are no other clues left. I don't want to allow even the possibility that you will refuse. How about a little trip? For a consultation with a specialist? I've contacted him beforehand, so it should be quick now.
    "What do you mean, 'no leads left? - Jesper doesn't understand. - And Moline's letters? Someone must have sent them: the handwriting matched, and it's still forming at that age. If the writer is fifteen years old, the handwriting may not match 100% of what it was at thirteen. 95% is very promising, I've read about that. Right, Teresh?"
    "Yeah, yeah, that's all right," Han interjects. - But you know what? I've got an idea how to deal with all this. Just don't put it off until later. We have to act, now!"
    "What do you mean?"
    "I put an ad in the newspapers."
    Térész paddles along behind him; in his fifties style herringbone coat, he looks like a typical goyko. His mouth is open and pensive.
    "That's probably not a bad idea - when did you put the ad in?"
    "Served the day before yesterday, should be out today. Jesper, I left your number too, in case I'm not home."
    "And what did you write there?"
    "'If anyone has any information, please share, you're in no danger, you can still save them!", what else?!"
    "Such methods can be more effective than one might think," explains Teres Jesper. - Especially with such long-standing events. But you'd still have to cast your fishing line in different places for months-if not years. Han, where did you send him?"
    "To 'Today' and to 'The Capitalist.' That's all I had enough money for. By the way, you both owe me a fiver each. You'll also need money for the consultant I'm offering. And for the trip to him. You should take at least a thousand with you: his services are expensive, he's a very sought-after specialist. I've been preparing for so long, reading about him..."
    Jesper is starting to get annoyed. First, he doesn't want to go anywhere at all, and second, he guesses whose money is involved. Khan lives on the insurance payments for the death of his father, who died on the oil rig, and Teresh, unless he opens an official investigation, will not be paid anything.
    "Hey, spit it out, what's another consultant?"
    Three silhouettes approach the cliff. In front of them, beyond the dried-up meadow, a sea expanse opens up. White patches of snow lie on the stunted grass, and a lone twisted pine tree freezes in the wind. By the time they reach the shore, it is beginning to get dark. The sound of water grows louder and louder. Jesper pulls the edges of his collar together with his hand. He often walks these six kilometers to the shore alone. From here they can see what they all yearn to see: in the distance, on the other side of the bay, the shoreline of Charlotteville is blue behind the snowy fog.
    Khan leans against the log fence and looks down. Huge swells crash against the stone wall; the wave tilts back, and its white crest breaks into millions of foamy flakes. Drops of water settle on his glasses, blurring the image. Jesper takes a closer look at the fall wave that comes once a year, and he has a clear plan. Disappear. I'll tell the girl I'm going with the boys, I'll tell the boys something to lie about, too. He assesses the wind.
    "Esi-chil," says Han, "it's time to ask him about the girls.
    Jesper laughs, but Teresh remains serious.
    "Wait! He located the skeletons of Abadanaiz and Dobreva to within a kilometer," Khan argues. - What else? Two years ago, at his hint, an expedition was sent to Corpus Mundi - in search of Cornelius Gurdi. The ridge he pointed out to them is now gone into the Grey, but Gurdi's utensils and the remains of his camp were found there. Five hundred years later! Easy-chill lives in Lemminkäis, in a manor house in the woods, and we will go there."
    It's snowing over the leaden gray sea, temperatures near freezing, winds in the bay up to ten meters per second; in a couple of weeks the ocean will swell from storms born in West Katla, at the very edge of Grayness. A two-week window, perfect conditions. Jesper already imagines the huge mass of water crushing into waves ten kilometers away, off Charlotteville Beach. The waves move smoothly before his eyes, smooth and uninterrupted, like folding thoughts.
    "Okay," Jesper says, "only I have a conference. On design. Thursday through Saturday. And by the way, going to Lemminkäis now is not a good idea. Or maybe you don't know?"
   
    *****
    Little Ulv is nine years old; modern dance music is emerging in Oranje. Johan Hauer, Rietveld and Arno Van Eyck spin records in university halls; the world's first disco, Das Baum, opens in Vesper, in Wiederund; in the arcade square of Messina on a summer evening, after the grandest set in human history, an exalted crowd announces Theo Van Kock as the new light. Behind his back, Ulv has a satchel and is walking from school. He's in the fourth grade, he sits alone at the back of his desk, because Ulvi doesn't care what the teacher says. Ulvi isn't interested in math or science. Stupid girls don't interest Ulvi, Ulvi is only interested in one thing in the world. With his mouth hanging open, he stops in front of the Phonoteca store in Westeralm, at the doors where music lovers come in and out. Theo Van Cock plays, a coma remix of an old overture, and the music lovers watch, frozen with tapes in hand, as little Ulv dances under the speakers hanging over the entrance, as if possessed by an evil spirit. Tears roll down Ulvi's cheeks, the whole world disappears for him. Everyone laughs, watching with delight as the boy spins and bounces and swings and waves his arms and shouts: "Wow, that's something!" He throws up his arms and legs, slams his palms on the hood of a parked motorcycle carriage and can't understand in any way, "What makes it feel so good?! It feels so good!!!"
    A salesman in a fancy sports jacket emerges from the store: out of the gray chaos of lost things, where the coma covers the entire history of mankind, a young man appears before Ulvi and hands him a stereo-8 tape. The box reads, "Theo Van Cock/Graff de Perouse-Mitresi." This is the first and last time in Ulvi's life that a living man has ever meant anything to him.
   
    *****
   
    The chrome rims on the wheels of the motocaret spin, the snow rustles under the wheel chains, but Inayat Khan is not there, he is thirteen, and he descends from the porch of the diplomatic cottage into the apple orchard. It is dark, crickets chirping. Easy-chill puts a stereo-8 tape in the turntable, two plastic circles start spinning. Soundcheck is going on, but the June night is quiet, this music can't be heard there. It's playing twenty years later and far, far away from Inayat Khan. The air in the garden is filled with scents; like the spirit of the place, it comes out from under the trees to meet the boy, rubbing against his feet and smelling of early-ripening suisleps. Han treads barefoot on the dew-wet grass. The others sleep inside, on the second floor, but he is awake. At half past eight in the morning the three of them went out to work on the construction site. Han's body aches from the hard work, but his soul is restless. The ends do not want to come together. Ziga's dealer demanded an exorbitant sum of three hundred reais by telephone. Jesper took his collection of adventure novels about the Man from Hjelmdall after much persuasion. Han sold the binoculars.
    The sixteen combustion chambers in the heart of the car detonate fuel; the windows in the windows of the manor house far away in Lemminkäis shake to the rhythm of the bass. Check, check... But Inayat Khan is not there. A suislip falls into the grass at his feet. Little Inayat wipes the apple on his sleeve and sits down on the garden bench. He sinks his teeth into the fruit and feels a sweet pain pierce his heart - so much so that it becomes difficult to breathe. It's a sense of elusive possibility that builds up during the day and makes itself felt by evening. "Tell me something... you always have such interesting reports. Both history and science..." Dark green eyes, infinitely kind and very interested. Are you sure, Han? Come on, be sensible: there's no point in humiliating yourself like this, for no good reason.
    Steam is coming from under the hood, the motor drive belt is running there; the magnetic tape is sliding over the reader. But there is silence under the apple trees in the orchard. Inayat Khan doesn't really believe in God. They say that God was once, over three thousand years ago, invented by a man named Pius. That may have been true. But now Khan throws an apple stump into the bushes, folds his hands, and prays.
    "Please make Moline like me, too. God, please make her really like me, for real, not just... well, you're a god. I promise I'll never again think of you as some Pius of Pericarnassus who made you up. I promise that I will believe that you existed from the beginning of time and drew the heavens and the earth... with a golden compass...? Or I don't know with what. God, please forgive me for pestering you like this-but it would really be very hard for me to believe that you exist if it turned out that Moline Lund didn't like me."
    Khan looks up into the sky. The darkness in his heart swirls, and star after star lights up in it. Love, like a smooth-haired cat, pulls at the strings in his belly. Love to him is the fear of loss.
   
    The carriage's taillights stain the snow blood-red, smoke rumbles out of the muffler. The chain-linked tires gnaw into the snow, the engine roars. The gear shifts. The tone rises. Acceleration presses the daredevil chauffeur into the back of the seat. The young man sitting in the cab has racing goggles on his head; his hands seem to be stuck to the levers. The unlit mountain road is reflected in the frost-covered windows and disappears under the wheels.
    In the atmosphere above the Lemminkäjse entrocatastrophe zone, snow is blowing. Dark mountain ranges pierce the horizon with snow-capped peaks, baring their teeth like a Linoleum Seller. At the bottom of the valley, glades and spruce forests spread out, and a black motor-car rushes along the serpentine on the mountainside at one hundred and fifty kilometers per hour.
    "Damn, that's scary!" - Han shouts. Teresh nods; the cool cabin air is filled with fuel oil fumes-a sour chemical odor. The agent looks out the window: fence posts whizzing by in the snowfall, and down in the valley you can see a white forest massif with blackening glades. Han jumps closer to Teresh in the opposite seat. He shakes the last drop of flavored berry wine on his tongue from the bottle. The car turns and Han throws it against the interior wall. "We're out," he shows Teresh the empty bottle. But immediately Han has a new berry in his hand. The lid unscrews with a crunch, the "sugar: 25%" crunching on his teeth. Far across the valley, on the opposite slope, lights flicker in the darkness. All the other cars are still driving toward them, away from the site of the entroponic disaster-just as they were Wednesday night. Then Han and Agent Macheek drive out of Vaasa with crazy motorcycle racer Kenny - just Kenny: "What's your name?" - "Kenni." - "Kenni, and then what?" - "Väin Kenni."
    "Kattoo, entroponeetisen romahduksen vyöhyke! Ei voi olla, kuusetkin rupee taivaasen ajautumaan, saa-ta-na, ihan kuin ne sanoi, sen kyllä täytyy nähdää! Ja talot myös!"** Kenny shouts from the driver's seat through the roar of the engine.
    "Everything okay?" - Han shouts back. He, unlike Teresh, is still a little worried that the car is shaking and that the speedometer hand, glowing dimly yellow in the gloom of the cabin, is creeping toward a hundred and seventy.
    "Hienosti menee, ihan hienosti, en huolehdi ollenkaan!"***
    "And the road, what about the road?"
    "Että mikä, tiekö? Ei, hyvin on, en huolehdi ollenkaan "**** - Kenny doesn't want huolehdi. Kenny wants flavored berry wine, and when Han remarks that Kenny probably shouldn't drink while driving, Kenny says, "Äla huolehdi, okay? Mä oonpuolet tiet juonu jo, muuten mä nukahtaisin. Se autta mua keskitymään, kato!"*****
    The road curves higher and higher up the hill, among the spruce trees. Kenny drifts the car to get into the corner. Khan only begins to feel more or less safe when the motocarriage turns off the serpentine and dives deep into the woods. The snow rustles under the wheel chains, the engine roars, the windows are round with snow stuck in the corners. Outside the portholes a black wall of woods ripples. Suddenly Kenny pulls the car to the left curb, and Han is thrown back to his previous position. The motocarriage whizzes past a red-painted Grad Telecom van. The news agency crew waves to Khan through its snowy portholes, Khan waves back.
    For the last two days all he's done is drink with Teresh in the cab: the driver refuses to stop unnecessarily, Kenny wants to break the record. He has a stopwatch on his hand. And all the while they were watching all the other cars going in the opposite direction. Two hundred kilometers from Vaasa, their carriage passed a huge traffic jam in the oncoming lane. People from the outskirts were going to the cities, to their relatives. From the crackling of the radio, it was clear that the same panic was reigning everywhere in Katla. In Arda, just in case, everyone goes to Norrköping, where there's a magnet station. And in Jelinka, near the ruined North Isthmus, tickets are also sold out two months in advance. It's either that or nothing - unless you want to walk across the Polar Plateau.
    The plains in the side window gradually changed to hills, whale backs with spruce forests on their humps slid into the fog on the horizon. Late at night the motorway entered the highway, but the flow of cars in the oncoming lane did not thin out - only the road descended from the overpass and went among the fields, and there was more snow: the fields around were already completely white. Khan was fast asleep, leaning his head against the side window, and in front of their carriage the diamond sea of headlights shone in the darkness on one side, and the ominously empty highway lay on the other. A lone pair of red taillights glided swiftly forward toward Lemminkäis. Only army motorcades and foreign news-agency cars with radio antennas on their roofs rode this way.
    When Han opened his eyes, it was morning, and the deserted village of Suru floated by behind the glass. Electric wires stretched in waves from pole to pole, and beneath them, on an empty street, a village girl was riding her bicycle. She was wearing a jacket and a long skirt. The girl looked Han straight in the eye, the cataphotas on the spokes of the wheels reflecting the light. Vaasa was a thousand five hundred kilometers behind, with another thousand five hundred to go. Kenny drove quietly, and the sound of ice breaking under the wheels on puddles could be heard in the cabin. The girl waved and turned onto a side road at the edge of the village. The dusk beneath the trees engulfed her; only the taillight of her bicycle flashed to the rhythm of the dynamo. In the forest, a corridor of trees, snow was already falling. And they rode on - Inayat Khan and Teresh Macheek - with the wackiest guy in the cab company, Kenny, just Kenny. For several hours the friends sat in silence and just watched Surumaa move past in the twilight. The cold stars of the street lamps flickered in the distance, and cracked limegrass lay on the roofs of the houses. The closer to evening, the thicker the snow became. The dark peaks of the mountains appeared on the horizon, the villages became rarer and rarer, and Teresh offered to open another bottle of flavored berry wine.
    "Otherwise it will be quite dreary."
    Up ahead, over the dusk-shrouded mountains, they often saw military balloons in the sky. Once an iron brig had flown directly over the bridge, catching them in the beam of a searchlight; the air cushion nearly toppled the carriage. But then the ship was gone. Only the beams of its searchlights still glided through the dark forest. It's called an evacuation.
    At the side of the road, next to the glowing letters "LEMMINKYASE," stood an empty checkpoint booth, orphaned. The road was crossed by military-style concrete barriers; Kenny pulled up the chains on his wheels and drove around the barriers, detouring halfway across the field. Along with the checkpoint, the invisible Winter Orbit, where winter always came from, was left behind. After a while, the asphalt ended; on snow-covered gravel roads, village families rode in sleighs to meet them. The children had the great privilege of seeing with their own eyes how Gray grew just beyond the silos. Horses pulled the sled past, and the family, sitting on a mountain of stuff, waved to a funny dark-skinned fat man with diametric glasses.
    "So strange: they're all waving at us," Han says, and the Grad Telecom van remains far behind, in a swirl of snow from under the wheels of Kenny's car. Deep in the dark woods no longer shines the headlights or lanterns of the goose carts. In the farmsteads, in the combine settlements, in the closed village stores, the only people left now were those who decided to stay. In the darkness above, Greyness ripples.
    "Kuuletko sen? - asks Kenny from the cabin. - Harmaa... se on nytvarmasti harmaa! Mua vähän huolestutta." ******
    Teresh and Han listen. And indeed, a new sound has been added to the noise of the blizzard: an ominous crackling, low hissing murmur. Like a wave crashing against the shore - slowly and slowly... To Han it sounds like the beginning of a song. He heard it in his sleep.
    "I'm no longer at CoMille, I've been fired," the drunken Teresh shouts, palms folded in a horn.
    "What?" - Han doesn't immediately understand what he's been told: the noise has hypnotized him. He feels the hairs on his body rise up and goosebumps run down his skin, as if he had just taken off his sweater in a cold room.
    "I was fired from the International Police!"
    "I know! - Han shouts, holding out a bottle of wine to Teresh. - You've been showing some Somerset Ulrich's badge all the way!"
    "How do you know?" - The smell of alcohol on Teresh's breath fills the freezing interior.
    "You were called Mr. Ulrich, or Agent Ulrich, or Somerset Ulrich at all the checkpoints.
    "It's the missing agent, I took his papers. There are others," Teresh takes a sip, his lips staining red, the sticky liquid spilling from the bottle onto his shirt collar. - Documents, I mean. And the missing agents, too. In Kronstadt I was still Macheek - I had to leave a false trail. With the Ulrich I'm going to make it to Leminkäise and cross the border!"
    "What are you, wanted?"
    "Yeah, didn't I tell you? A guy had a heart attack from that thing!"
    "From ZA/UM?"
    "From the man himself," Teresh says, and ahead of him, motorcycle racer Kenny watches as the black mass of trees slowly floats away into the sky. The ground cracks and rattles as the spruces are ripped out of it with the roots. The tree screams, the frozen rock groans like a dentist's chair. The limestone rock rises slowly into the air, and in the darkness far above, the first trees plunge into Grayness.
   
    Two years ago.
    In his sleep, Han hears a phone call. A cold and unfamiliar sound, a false awakening. He opens his eyes in the basement of his parents' house and gets out of bed, in his pajama pants and slippers. He senses something wrong, but goes anyway. The basement looks strange, like a dream, things are out of place. Nadia Harnancourt smiles creepily in her locket; Gong-Tzu has a peach of immortality in his hand instead of a compass, and mold is sprouting on it.
    On a table in the middle of the room, an empty glass display case gleams. Han is afraid to look in its direction: there is something in its emptiness that he does not remember. Something is wrong. The phone rings again-the sound seems to be coming through the darkness of the apartment, from the upstairs hallway.
    Han walks up the stairs into the sleeping hallway; the phone rings on the wall. Han stretches out his hand; he is scared. His palm sweats against the plastic of the handset, something prevents him from taking it. But he has to, it's important, any clue is important. Here he takes the tube off the lever, and the corridor fills with the hissing crackle of Grays. It makes his ear ache.
    "Hello?" - Han says.
    But there is no answer.
    "Hello, who is this? Please tell me who you are!" he repeats, and each time his voice grows more pitiful and the crackling gets louder and louder - until finally it deafens Han completely, displacing the pressure in his inner ear. All that remains is an incomprehensible vibration, coming from somewhere inside. Silence ripples through flesh and bone. It's cold.
    "Please," tears flowed from under Han's glasses. Tell me who you are..."
    "You know who I am."
    The vibe has a childlike voice, and he says horrible things. Han trembles, huddled in a corner of the corridor with a pipe in his hand.
    "It's not you, it's not you!" - he sobs. Naturally, his body shakes from what is going on in his mind. Han wakes up in tears in his bed. His ear buzzes, the reality seems like a continuation of the dream, only there is a model of an airship in the window again, Nadia is no longer smiling, and Gongzi has a compass in his hand.
    On the lid of the window is a plate of my mother's dried cheese sandwiches and cold coffee. And an envelope: a morning delivery from Grad by magnetic mail. The envelope says "Saryan Hambardzumyan" under "sender," and inside is a key, golden and inconceivably complicated.
    Two years to go.
   
    ____________________________________________
   
    * Just Kenny.
    **Yeah, an entroponic disaster zone! Can you imagine, there are Christmas trees flying straight up into the sky, I'll be damned, it's a sight to see! And the houses, too!
    ***Everything is fine, just fine, nothing to worry about.
    ****What, the road? It's fine, nothing to worry about.
    ***** Don't worry, okay? I've already had some to keep me awake. It makes it easier for me to concentrate!
    ******Do you hear that? Grayness... It really is Grayness! I'm getting a little worried.
   

▲
12. ZIGI
⬍
12. ZIGI
    Nineteen years ago, late fall. It's 8:15, and Han is late for school. He is rushing downtown, to Königsmalmalm. The road markings glow white in the morning twilight, the wet snow is falling thickly. A boy with a satchel on his back runs through the alley; a horn blares and a caravan whizzes past. It nearly knocks Han over. The snow slush covers his eyes, melts on his cheeks and woolen hat. Khan runs up to the school porch, but suddenly something makes him freeze in place. At the corner of the school, the janitor and the cleaning lady are scrubbing a big red letter O off the front of the school. The letter is as tall as the janitor. The policeman, shaking his head, looks at the wall, where a huge slogan reads: "THE WORLD IS A NEPOSSIBLE ZONE OF ENTHROPONETIC CATASTROPHE.
    It's Ziggy's boy.
    Ziggy is the baddest boy in school. Ziggy is so bad that some would even say that Ziggy is too bad a boy. "He's in tenth grade, only guess what? He got transferred to us from another school, Sixten has a friend there, and he says Zygi got transferred to them from another school, too. Guess which grade Ziggy went to there! Yeah! Tenth grade, too. That's right, I'll bet. And you know what else? That school he went to before that...he was in the tenth grade there, too!" Ziga's mother, a blossoming native of Vaasa, serves in the Ministry of Education and is friends with the Lund sisters' mother. So her son attends a prestigious school downtown, though he has twice stayed for a second year. At home he has stacks of checkered notebooks with drawings of all sorts of siege machines, city walls, and trajectories, but Zigi doesn't want you to know about it.
    Zigi's father is a nihilist, a goyko, and a drunkard. Zigi is very proud of this: "My father? Well... he's a nihilist... a goyko... a drunkard..." Zigi's full name is Zygismunt Berg. Teresz once met him in the boys' bathroom, threw up his left fist and said: "Frantisek the Brave!" Zygi didn't say anything back. Ziggy pissed himself. Psst. Then Zigi walked toward the exit, and at the very door he suddenly stopped. The locks on his leather jacket jingled.
    "Hey, little guy, listen up!"
    "What?"
    "Shove your Frantisek the Brave up your ass."
    Ziggy is a nihilist and a communist. When necessary. The word "bourgeoisie" pops out of his mouth easily and deftly, like the blade of a butterfly knife: "bourgeois," "bourgeois," "bourgeois art," "petit-bourgeois views," "you bourgeois," "your bourgeois parents," "you come from a bourgeois family," "because your parents are bourgeois, "all because, you, Anna, are a bourgeois" (yes, Zigi also calls teachers by their first names), "bourgeois chick", "bourgeois puppy", "pederasty is a bourgeois disease, pederasts are bourgeois". Zigui is a well-read boy, he knows many beautiful names for the bourgeoisie: "bourgeois," "plutocrat," "petit-bourgeois," "bourgeois," "middle class," "burgher," "fist," "rentier," "latifundist...
    His influence is enormous. A girl with pigtails, a fourth grader, comes home and asks: "Daddy, why is social democracy so weak?"
    "Where did you hear that?"
    "Ziggy says that social democracy is weak and communism is strong. Daddy, why don't we have communism?"
    But above all, Zigui is a nihilist. He reads diamatism, he calls animals automatons, he is a fan of behaviorism, Grey, and the Meskian nihilist luminary Ambrosius Saint-Mirault. "If you had even a little courage in you, even a little bit, you would also go after Saint-Miro." In a report on her home country, Zigui talks about the coup d'état. About how it ceased to be Zygi's country. Zygi has no homeland. The geography teacher sent him to the principal's office. Zygi stopped at the door, jingling the locks on his jacket. "See you in Grey," he said, and ran his index finger down his throat. Since entroponetics was not yet taught in schools, many people gathered around Zygi during recess, and his half-truth echoed down the hallway:
    "The grayness consists of the past," he said. - It's where all the missing things are stored - jumbled, sad, abandoned. The grayness is the memory of the world. It sweeps away everything in its path and eventually consumes all matter. It's called entroponic collapse."
    "And when will it come, Ziggy?"
    "Yes, Ziggy, when?"
    "Back in your lifetime, little Olle. At least I hope so. History is devouring the present, the material world is disappearing, desaparecido... So there is no point in our generation going to school, there will be no future. When you grow up, don't have children like your backward bourgeois parents. You'll just see them die, that's all. There's not much of the world left, much less Grey! Soon all the isolas will disappear - hundreds and thousands of square kilometers of land will sink into Greyness, will go down like ships. Woohooh... - Ziggy imitates a sinking ship with his hands, the locks on his leather jacket jingle, the children gasp. - Don't be sad, Olle, this will be humanity's finest hour.
    Ziggy smokes. In the school bathroom, in the locker room. Zigi has his own Sprechgesang Band, and the vice principal of extracurricular activities made a big mistake in letting them perform on Winter Solstice Day. Ziggy's Sprechgesang is like a machine gun. Four hundred bullets a minute...
   
    Hook:
    Have a smoke!
    In the locker room, in the latrine, in the canteen,
    abraq adabra, and the world disappears like smoke.
    1st verse:
    It's another bad morning, crappy weather,
    The day hasn't even started yet, and I already don't feel like living.
    If you feel like the world hates you,
    go around the corner and pick up your cigarette butt - your mom won't see it.
    Have a smoke, that's what you need right now,
    One good puff will warm both body and soul.
    Hook:
    Abraq adabra, behind the school, under the stairs, at the bus stop,
    abraq adabra, and the smoke disappears like the world.
   
    And so on. In January, Zigi was expelled from school. But the reason was not his questionable lyrics. The liberal Waas education system of the fifties viewed such creativity as a natural part of growing up. The fact was that Zigui sold drugs. That's why he came to this school. In those days, no one expected such a thing, and Ziggy was well aware of that. He acted fearlessly, right in the classroom, talking openly and loudly about the deals, handing out samples, reaping the benefits of Vaasa's naiveté, like Vidkun Heard or the Linoleum Salesman. He was using himself - he came to class stoned; he was an anachronism, twenty years ahead of his time. Zygismunt Berg was a lousy sheep.
    When the police finally tracked down Ziggy, he emigrated to Grad, to his father. And disappeared off the radar. A few years later his charred body was found in a garbage incinerator in the boiler room of a particularly dreary panel building.

▲
13. A CHEMICAL WEDDING
⬍
    13. A CHEMICAL WEDDING
   
    A blond lock of hair is in his eyes, his eyebrows furrowed by the sun hitting his face, little Jesper de la Gardie stands in the middle of the transportation hub of his sense of time. Everything converges at this point, and from it everything emanates. For a special occasion he is wearing a white sailor's suit; in his hands he nervously rubs a cap with a dark blue fringe. Jesper is thirteen, has a bottle opener in his pants pocket, a handkerchief with his initials and twenty-four speed pills, and a bouquet of lilies on the bench beside him. Everything that was, leads here, to the stop of the Charlotteville Conway, and everything that will be, originates here. It is the first of July in the year fifty-second, Jesper stands on the edge of a summer evening under the defiant white arch of the funky stop pavilion! He is frightened, as if he can hear the clatter of the amusement park carriage that has been slowly taking him to the top since just last Sunday. And so it has been all this week: the rise, the anticipation of the turn. And after that, the falls, nerves strained to the breaking point. The first streetcar arrives, but the girls are not there. The boy feels strangely relieved - like three years ago, when he was too young for the Steel Mountain ride at the Revasholle amusement park. He barely escaped danger. But here comes the next streetcar dropping off its passengers at the stop, and the girls are still not among them. The feeling in his stomach turns upside down, becoming frustration. What if they don't come? It's half past nine; they should have been here an hour ago. "To ride the Steel Mountain, you have to grow to that mark, boy." Jesper lifts up on his toes and takes a sip of beer for reassurance. He knows that drinking beer is a terrible idea: it stinks of hops.
    "That's a terrible idea, Teresh. Beer stinks, chicks hate beer!" But after a week of construction work, three hundred reals given to the baddest boy at Zigi's school for the mysterious pills... after buying batteries for the record player, flowers and God knows what else, he couldn't disagree with Teresch. He said: "We're broke, Jesper, and we're not going dry... we're not going dry." So they stood in front of the pub, and the obliging tramps were already anticipating a share of the booze for helping them buy. The salesman looked at the three rascally boys in a judgmental manner, and the boys watched as the foamy drink poured from the cistern into cardboard cups.
    "Like piss," Jesper commented.
    Khan, holding his half-liter in his swarthy hands, watched Jesper drum his fingers on the margins of his sailor's cap.
    "Shut up and drink, your hands are shaking."
    "Mm-hmm... and you've had your drink, haven't you? - Jesper answered in a sweet voice, sniffing his glass. - We're trying to look decent here, and you give off such a gorgeous piss smell!"
    Han, who was sensitive to jokes, immediately snorted and spilled stinky beer.
    Now Han is standing at the bus stop, nervously groping himself and kicking small pebbles across the road. Sometimes a pebble hits one of the campers, and he throws an angry look at the boy from the other side of the road. Han apologizes and waves the hem of his shirt, which still has a beer stain on it, in the sea wind.
    "What, it stinks? Jesper, can you smell it?"
    "Yeah, it stinks, and you can see the stain, too. Look over there when the next streetcar comes.
    "At nine, two more minutes."
    "I didn't ask you to say, I asked you to go and see!"
    Having sent Han away, Jesper quickly drinks his beer and throws the glass away. Just short of a flight, the cardboard cup bounces off the edge of the trashcan. "Shit!"
    Terech, greasy-haired as hell, after working at a construction site in the hot sun, twitches his knees and fiddles with his feet in high kirzov boots. Behind him hangs a portable turntable on leather straps. The engraved inscription on the cream plastic reads: "Mono. The machine is huge and weighs like a pile of bricks. In his hand, Teresh tosses weighty batteries.
    "So, are you tipsy yet? - he asks Jesper. - I am."
    Jesper got tipsy, but not too much.
    "That's good, we drink for courage, not to get drunk. We just need to smooth the edges," says Teresh. He seems to be the only one who hasn't been knocked out by an hour late. We gray ragamuffin goyko's have been through the genocide and the Yugo-Graad massacre in a drunken stupor... As long as we have stinky hop and malt or fruit and berry wine, nothing can scare us.
    Khan picks up his bundle of chrysanthemums from the bench, and the boys sit in a row and sit, stomping on the pavement and clapping their hands. Out of tune and out of tune. From over the hill comes the creaking of the rails, and Teresh clutches his bouquet of seven red roses in his hands in horror. The clatter of hoofs comes closer, the horses have already appeared on the slope and one can see the silver cockade on the driver's cap gleaming. Taresh's hop is gone and he nervously wrinkles the silver bouquet wrapper. He was not petty: seven red roses, all serious. He should have bought another box of chocolates, such a beautiful one, with gold embossed lettering, like on the covers of Grad novels, but his pockets were already empty. Something white flickers in the streetcar window, and out of the corner of his eye Teresh sees Jesper rising from the bench. Let Jesper show off his lilies, and let Han fiddle with the chrysanthemums! Roses, red ones, seven of them: that's chic! Róže i bomboniera, bardzo wybornie, Tereesz Machejek!
    The wagon doors swing open with a steel clang, and the boy does not even notice the spikes digging into his convulsively clenched hands. The expectation is remembered in every detail, but the event itself was so terrible that the moment completely disappeared behind the veil of excitement. Something had happened, he had done something. The three girls get off the carriage, long legs in socks step from the footboard onto the pavement; God, how cruel to dress up like that! The skirt flutters in the wind, such careless chic, as if nothing much is going on. Charlotte stands in front of Teresh, casually placing her hand on his thigh, but Teresh doesn't take the hint and makes the mistake of embracing the girl. His arms wrap around her, a huge bouquet hangs behind her back, pressed against her dress, gold dust crumbles from the flowers - oh-oh, is that a wybornie? He almost touches the girl's neck with his face, smells her unfamiliar scent. They look at each other - Teresh and the ninth-grade goddess - and Teresh, with a goofy smile all over his red-brown face, says to her: "Hi!"
    "Well, hello to you, too!" - Charlotte replies with gruff charm. As if nothing had happened. The girl takes the flowers from him, and they all walk together under the pines, where the evening sun can't reach. It's dark and quiet, and no one knows what to say.
   
    Outside, in the courtyard of the Easy Chill homestead, Kenny takes the motocarriage to the starting position. The heavy sounds of the exhaust merge with the noise of the trees in the distance, at the edge of the Grays. Its pressing proximity can be felt even in the big house, behind the stone-lined walls. The light of the headlights from the yard shines through the dusty window and falls on the cracked stone floor in the front of the old manor house. A smiling face gleams on the window pane, drawn with a finger in the dust.
    No one came out at the knock on the door, the lock was invitingly open, and there were flashlights hanging on the wall in the hallway. With these lanterns in their hands, Teresh Macheek, a former International Police officer, and Inayat Khan, the basement desaparetic, now walk through the maze of dark rooms. Lantern beams glide over rows of garden tools, parts of a disassembled cart, a pile of old furniture. Han squeezes between stacks of shingles, and lanky Teresh walks ahead practically bent over to avoid hitting the low ceiling. Another uninhabited den. A side door leads to a spacious kitchen with a sooty ceiling, smelling of lime and mold. A flashlight illuminates a battery of bottles and something that looks like a piece of sausage. From time to time Han tries unsuccessfully to call the owner.
    "Are you sure we're where we're supposed to be?"
    Han firmly believes this, and Teresh seems to hear the ringing of bells in the chaos of the distant, muffled sounds of disaster. The ringing comes closer, appearing then disappearing like a mirage. But it does not come from outside, where the roots of the trees creak beneath the ground and the electric wires rattle in the sky. It sounds somewhere here, in a house without electricity. Teresh sits down on a bundle of waste paper and studies the room in a dusty cone of light. He's still a little tipsy after his berry wine, but the darkness is sobering. Doors lined with miscellaneous junk open on all four sides. He thinks he hears the low hum of an electric generator coming from somewhere deep inside the house through the ringing, and he decides to go for the sound. Creaking the jammed door, he enters a large, low-ceilinged hall.
    Turning off his flashlight, Teresh cautiously steps onto the rubber tile floor. It's cold inside. The pungent smell of gasoline pierces through the mold. Wires near his boots, woven like black snakeskin balls, wind their way into the darkness in the far corner of the room. Green and yellow lights flash rhythmically there. The room is scarcely lit by candles: they flicker on cartwheels suspended from the ceiling, casting a yellowish light on the floor; the windows are black with darkness. Teresh stands in the patch of light and hears the sound of chimes circling around him, icy and alien. Along the plastered walls, equipment piles up on platforms. Khan stops at the door and runs his fingers over the embossed "Mono" inscription.
    "Teresh," he whispers, "Mono! And here it says 'Hertz. - Under his fingers, notches of high frequencies faintly twitch. - Isn't that..."
    "... Disco," Teresh nods. - It's a disco."
    Three-quarters of a century ago, an impenetrable night descended on the Ozonne Islands. Everything is gray, dark gray, and under the overcast sky, black waves wash over the beach sand. Palm leaf sabers sway over the heads of revolutionary lovers. The coup attempts are crushed, it's all gone, it's all over. Dobreva opens her anarchist eyes in dark makeup. At the corner of her mouth, bubbling, a drip of venom dries up. Abadanaiz strokes her head, the shards of the ampoule crunching on his teeth. "Do you hear that?" - he says, and the mesmerizing rhythm of bells chimes over the water in the pitch-black darkness. Inside the black and white world, color begins to seep in little by little.
    "Let's dance!" - Dobreva shrieks girlishly. She gets up and walks. Abadanaiz follows her into the waves, and the black water splashes around his ankles.
    "Do you hear that?" - asks Teresh Khan.
    "It's like something ringing, isn't it?"
    "Aha," Teresh removes the candle from the nail on the rim of the wheel and points it into the half-darkened space of the room. Stepping carefully along the floorboards, they walk reverently to the far end of the room. Step by step a mixing desk with rows of sliders, monolithic speakers rising to the ceiling on either side of it, and finally a young man in a fancy sports jacket sitting behind it emerge from the darkness. A collapsible earbud pins his curly hair against his head. Ulv's chin quivers in rhythm with the sounds, but his eyes are closed, his face frozen with tension.
    "Mr. Ulv? - Han whispers almost silently. - I'm sorry, don't..."
    "Shh..." - the young man puts his finger to his lips. Still not opening his eyes, he frowns his eyebrows so hard that it seems as if an explosion is erupting from under his eyelids.
    "Please... don't ruin... my intro," Eazy-chill pronounces, as if a huge river is pressing against his teeth like a dam from within, a surpassing human load of rapture meant for him alone. He points his finger at the mixing desk, where dozens and dozens of sliders shift upward at an excruciatingly slow pace.
    "This is the most important ... place."
    Han carefully places the envelope on the studio monitor, where Easy-chill's hand is pointing. Teresh backs away, backing away, slowly, as if he were in an explosives warehouse. He manages to read the girls' names on the envelope. Thanks to his police training, he notices that there are in fact two: there is another hidden under the girls' envelope. But what is written on it, Teresh cannot see. He says nothing, and as he and Han tiptoe toward the exit, the chimes around them become louder than the sounds of the entroponic disaster outside the walls of the house, and Teresh notices that one is in strange harmony with the other. They are crossing minefields of junk. The sound behind them sprawls, like an explosion, a slowed down shotgun blast, just like it was then, eighty years ago. Kras Mazov stands in the doorway of his office, black and white, like in a newsreel. Gunpowder smoke rises from his mouth, while outside, in the garden in front of the Palace of the State Assembly, a crowd of counter-revolutionaries rages. But Kras Mazov no longer hears the treacherous voice of this world: the intro rings in the mirrors of his office.
   
    "So, what's up with the design conference? Ore Okerlund said he didn't see anything wrong with the war. Remember Ore? I once made the mistake of putting him next to me on a photo shoot for a design magazine. Now everyone thinks he did something interesting, too. With us together. He thinks that war these days is a kind of happening, a media experiment. No, I can't entirely rule that out: it could be. He would prefer to call it a "paradigm shift. - Jesper paces around the room on the top floor of the Hausenglar and rehearses to himself: "You know, after he left the bureau... he's completely lost his way in this life. He writes a music review column in "Today". And he's been deaf from cocaine for a long time! Seriously, it happens, he's had two septal perforations. You should have seen him! It's horrible. Nose like a pig. How does he write music reviews if he's deaf? He doesn't listen to it himself, he just reads foreign reviewers. His grading system removes points for rock and disco, so all he has to do is, as you would say, Han, put two and two together."
    Jesper stops by the bed and nods graciously at the beige cube-shaped table: "What was I doing in Lemminkäis? Oh, nothing, I went out with the guys, it was totally surreal, but it wasn't bad, I liked it. Christmas trees, snow, the end of the world. What, honey? Why did we even go there? Well, look. There's a specialist who lives there. His name is Ulv, and he throws parties for himself. People like him are rare. Usually people need someone else to get them fired up. Otherwise it's no fun. Ulv isn't like that. He doesn't need anyone, he's fine on his own. That's why they call him Easy-Clean. Imagine that: you get a drink in the evening, you play records, you dance, you talk to yourself. Kind of like me now. Only cooler. Normal people go to work in the morning, and you're still chillin'." - Jesper pulls back the frilly curtains; outside the balcony window is a dark overcast sky. Damp drip marks can be seen on the balcony.
    "What? Oh, yeah... Well, it's always like that. Anyway, he talks to the dead. Yes, that's right - he talks to the dead. They come when he puts them Van Eyck and old Rietveld. That's why he's such a loner. No, bunny, he can't stand Fackenhaff. - The doorknobclicks, and Jesper steps onto the mat-covered balcony. - He communicates with them through Grey. Whatever that means. Anyway, you can see why it's got us so hooked. This idea. Yeah, it's about those girls. That's right, ha ha ha!" It was from here that Director Trentmöller was watching them that day. Strange. He wouldn't say it was particularly creepy. A most ordinary hotel room. Too many seascapes on the walls, the mats in the hallway are disgusting, and the wallpaper is... well, better than nothing. Otherwise it's all tip-top, fifties elegance. Jesper looks down from the balcony. There's Charlotteville soaking in the rain, the autumn wave washing the beach. The balcony is high up, under the sky, on the twelfth floor. Jesper stands there alone. He spreads his hands: "Don't be naive, of course not. But the show was impressive. In their business, in witchcraft, the show is the most important thing. Treat them like entertainers. Well? Where shall we go for dinner? No, no, I really don't want to talk about it anymore."
    Before he leaves, Jesper stops briefly in the very center of room 1212 at the Hausenglar Hotel. The upholstery on the couch is green like moss, the ruffled curtains seem apricot-cream in the soft light of the floor lamp. No, he doesn't mind that at all. It's an evenly gray world all around, and the cozy, feminine chic of the room is snoozing in the middle. The epitome of the bourgeois dream. Jesper stands with his arms outstretched, as if waiting for something to happen. He takes a few steps with a defiant look and freezes, dropping his arms along his body. On the cube of the bedside table the scale of the radio gleams, the clock ticks, the curtains in front of the open balcony door swell like a sail.                            
    "Please," Jesper says and looks around the room, at its clean walls and high ceiling. But nothing happens. And before walking out and heading to the beach, the designer throws the room a disappointed, "Gross.
    Jesper walks confidently across the wet sand. The reeds rustle in the cold late autumn wind. The cliff, where they used to sit as boys, is now completely overgrown, blue in the distance behind a veil of water spray. A thin white surfboard, like a sword, thrusts into the autumn sky. Jesper lifts his beauty above his head. He casts a dismissive glance at the windsurfers in the water. Two hours soaking in a wetsuit, only to end up climbing some scraggly wave with ten other wimps just like them. No, Jesper has his own special place. He can already feel, somewhere deep in his chest, the waves surging, waiting for him.
   
    The skirt whites in the semi-darkness under the pines, fluttering around the thin legs of a fourteen-year-old girl. The boys walk forward, following the banner of Charlotte's skirt. How much further to the end of the trail? They have never been to this part of the pine forest before, where the sandy paths disappear into the dark green of the blueberry bushes. Long gone are the familiar places, the suspension bridges and the road to the bluffs. They walk in the twilight, the silence only occasionally interrupted by conversation. The shadows stretch farther and farther into the hills, and the wall of trees in front slowly parted.
    A field opens before them, undulating in the salty sea breeze. Low over the field hangs the orange-red sun. A sea of wild ruta rustles as Charlotte's sock-clad feet part it. Six long, arrow-like shadows glide across the field, the girls running light and the boys hurrying after them. Is it still Charlotteyal, the field with the reeds rippling in the wind around its edges? Where the light brown dry grass changes to fine white sand, Moline stops and drops her shoes. Standing next to Han, she breathes in the sea air with her dress laced chest. Near the horizon, in the blue mirror of the water, a second sun burns, broken apart by fine ripples, as if by an explosion. Above the water stretches jagged rows of blot-like clouds, almost black against the light. All six stand among the reeds, palms to their eyes, and the reedy giants bow to them, hands raised in awe.
    Annie, in shorts, plops down on the sand, and Teresh sullenly places the portable player in the reeds beside her. In the silence of arrival, the boy pulls out an antenna and turns on a shortwave receiver tuned to a popular youth station. A guitar pop blares from the speakers, completely out of tune with Teresh's mood. The girl does not hug him back. How still she was, Charlotte, how straight she stood on the heels of her sandals. He no longer dares to look at her: it seems to him that something broke in that moment. It seems so, it seems that something is broken forever. It reminds him of the Yugo-Graad massacre. Sooner or later the hop wears off and our unsightly nature comes out. After all, we are only goyko - with hair as brown as potato peels and eyes of incomprehensible color. And Moline, a fresh northern flower, snaps his fingers merrily at the sunset and asks Han, "Well, did you bring it?"
    "Brought it!" - Jesper hastily answers for him. He watches the girls blossom as he pulls out a paper bag from the depths of his pocket. Moline spreads out a blanket, and Annie pulls out six shimmering water bottles from her bag. She lays the bottles out in a row on the sand, and Charlotte explains that she's very thirsty after the pills. And that she'll have to go to the beach later and get more water. But that's okay, it will be a great adventure for whatever brave couple decides to go. At that word, the boys get a shiver of excitement. Couple!
    Only Teresh doesn't care. Teresh still thinks about genocide.
    Six in a circle, the girls across from the boys, they sit on blankets, and Charlotte shakes pills out of a paper bag onto her palm. The bag crunches. Noses move closer, and everyone watches as twenty-four crimson-red diamonds sparkle in her hand. The girl shuffles the gems from hand to hand, the chubby red wheels bouncing merrily. One bounces to the side, Charlotte shrieks, and Moline picks up the tablet like a trinket. Looking reproachfully at her older sister, she diligently blows sand off the pill and then runs her finger over its surface as if it were a sanding machine. Han sees the girl's lips turn as red as cherries. The colors of red speedos.
   
    "Hey, be a man, tell me already what this thing is," Teresh finally blurts out, at dusk, on the playground, where the locks of his leather jacket are tinkling with Zygi's dealer.
    It's last night, a guy with greasy black hair walks back and forth on the swings. Spreading his arms out for balance, he shuffles his jeans-clad legs over the beam of the swing, one in front of the other. He begins to say, "You've probably heard that drugs are a waste of health? - The other end of the swing hits the ground as the youngster passes the middle. - Escape from reality, meaningless bliss, that sort of thing? - It's a rhetorical question, and Ziggy answers it himself: -It's all pure truth. Coke makes you an asshole, weed makes you an idiot... Stay away from that stuff, it dulls the mind and, frankly, is dangerous to an immature body. It's not worth it. - Ziggy jumps off the swing, sand flying from under his sneakers. - But not this drug! Those who make such generalizations simply haven't tried ..." he pulls a paper bag from his back pocket and shoves it under Teresh's nose, "...Samara amphet! You have no idea how lucky you are! I'm inordinately generous today! I don't know why I'm selling it. Wouldn't you rather save it for yourself? - Ziggy's black eyes gleam in the twilight. - This stuff is so new, it doesn't even have a name yet! The girls call it red or cherry speeds, the guys say "Samara amp." That's because it's from the Samara People's Republic. Everything good in this world is made in the Samara People's Republic. It's brought to us by way of Gray. The world's first drug for regular use, invented by the communists! They have entroponauts taking it in Grey, so they are not afraid of anything! But what if you take it to get high? It's very innovative, very progressive. "The Flying Communist!" That's what they call it in Grad. But personally, I... You know what I call it?" - The shadows under Zygi's cheekbones, his black eyebrows and the creases in the corners of his eyes give him a villainous look.
    "Well?" - asks Teresh.
    "A chemical wedding," Ziggy replies. - I call it a chemical wedding."
   
    Inayat Khan sits across from Moline with his legs propped up, and watches as the girl, without a second's hesitation, pops the pills into her mouth as if they were lollipops. The bottle cap squeaks, unscrewing, and Moline wipes the water from her lips.
    "Well," she asks cheerfully, "what are we sitting around for? Let's do it now, or it won't work for forty-five minutes. It's a long wait."
    "You drank two?! - horrified Charlotte. - Crazy!"
    "What's the matter? - " murmurs Teresh, and Han feels a pang of fear for his friend, the prickly, absurdist philosopher. Still thinking about the Yugo-Graad massacre, Teresh crunches his pills. He doesn't take a snort, the sugary-sweetness of the saccharine chemicals fizzing in his mouth, but Teresh isn't particularly bothered by that. - I took two, too. "Flying commie!" he says, swallowing and spreading his arms like wings.
    "Hey, that's enough!" - Charlotte shouts, and Annie hisses: "Two is a lot, you have to start with half. What do we do with you now? Should we call an ambulance?"
    "Don't," Moline grinned. Last time I ate a whole one at once, and it was very good. It'll probably be twice as good now. What do you think, Teresh?"
    "I've read about bank robberies that were worse prepared for than we were for this evening," Khan suddenly, to his own surprise, intervenes in the conversation. - Here, gas lanterns in case it gets dark," he angrily pulls out three lanterns from the backpack confiscated from Teresh. - And a supply of water! - The water canister hums as it lands on the sand. - Because Ziggy said that underneath that thing - honestly, I never figured out what it's called - basically, everything tastes nasty underneath it. Things are already going... I don't know, weird."
    "Well, yes," Charlotte picks up the crimson-red pill, holding it with two fingers. She looks at Han, whose suddenly revealed leadership qualities have confused her a little, and says expectantly, "Skål?"
    "Skål," Han replies, and Jesper watches as his nerd friend and Charlotte clink their water bottles. Only Annie, lying across from him, is still rolling her pill in the palm of her hand.    "Well? - With her chin down on her hands, the girl casts a glance at Jesper. - Skål?" Jesper looks absent-mindedly over her head: at her butt in slit shorts at the sides, her legs bent at the knees, her feet with flip-flops dangling carelessly from them. The girl smiles; she doesn't swallow the pill at once, but holds it on her pointed tongue, letting it melt from her saliva.
    "They're sweet, so sweet it's even disgusting, but I really like them. I guess it's just because I know how good they make me feel. If you knew, you'd like it, too," the girl looks at Jesper, and Jesper looks away over her feet. At the cooling sunburst over the water. A sudden gust of wind rustles the reeds, and everyone is silent and listens. The boy sticks the wheel in his mouth and imagines the saccharine sparking on his tongue. After hesitating a second more, he swallows the pill. Fear rushes to his throat, the acidic environment of his stomach reacts by mindlessly decomposing the crimson-red diamond. Stabilizers and dyes fizzle. Waves lapping smoothly, as in a dream, the beach, seagulls screaming; to this dusky world, the boy in the white sailor's cap is now just a passenger: he is at the mercy of semi-synthetics. Jesper entrusted himself to it, the last of the six, but willingly. So did everyone else. He doesn't know it yet, but his undeveloped metabolism is already spreading microscopic flakes of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen through his body; an uncharacteristic combination of elementary particles is settling in him. Nothing else depends on him here, everything depends on them. They have their own plan, and it's forty-five minutes away. They build into it, form new patterns of behavior, seize control, the silent weapons of covert warfare.
    But this slightly noticeable psychopharmacological whiff is no match for the storm that has blossomed over Moline Lund's thirteen-year-old body. Tilting his head, Han watches as the girl rises to her feet and unravels her blond braid. Her hair flutters in the wind. Moline places her hands on her belly like a proud mother-to-be. Under her white polka dot dress, her metabolism goes into forced mode. She can already feel the morning sickness puffing up in her digestive tract as phenylethylamines spread across the pink, veined petals of her inner walls. Amphetamines of the latest generation, non plus ultra! Her body wants to get rid of the sneaky infiltrator, but she bravely keeps it inside her. She is also cunning: she has purposely not eaten anything all day; and she is also beautiful, very beautiful.
    On the cover of the girls' magazine, twelve diamonds lined up like knuckles on a bill. In the beginning there were twenty-four. One was taken by Charlotte, one by Annie, one by Jesper, and one by Han. Teresh took two. Let's count. Right now, while the wind flutters Moline's hair, and she feels it all-her unrecognized secret-already spilling over the blood-brain barrier. An apocalyptic storm of serotonin is rising. What can I say: Moline Lund has ravenous feline teeth, a soft, rounded body, a clean eighth-grade report card, and she likes to feel good about herself.
    The six of them sit in a row with their hands on their knees and are silent. They wait, the horizon line turns dark gold, and the sun, under an intermittent blue-green band of clouds, touches the water's edge. Moline marks its position with his thumb, like the rest of the time on an hourglass. The sun beneath her finger dips lower and lower, and, with each passing moment, the sky behind the girl grows darker and darker blue. Star after star lights up on it, and in the silence you can hear the sand hissing under the receding waves like bubbles in lemonade.
   
    Jesper stands on the beach, where, except for him, there is not a soul. Twenty years lie at his back, and the ocean waves rise up in front of him. With his right hand he holds the white blade of his surfboard, placed with its tail on the sand, his left hand resting on his hip. As usual on such an occasion, Jesper is dressed in black. He's wearing a full wetsuit with a helmet. His pale blue eyes peer out of the mask hole like a movie mugger's, his lips red with cold can be seen through the mouth slit. This deserted beach greets Jesper every year. The shoreline changes shape, the islets spread out over time like living sand, but the profile of the bottom always remains the same. Jesper wades through the reeds and slowly enters the ocean. The ten-degree water of the North Sea squeezes him firmly through his wetsuit, higher and higher with each step. Even through the cold-resistant neoprene skin of the suit, his body gives off its heat to the water. It happens slowly, imperceptibly. After three-quarters of an hour, hypothermia sets in.
    The waves are around his waist, the waves rise in front of him in the dark gray twilight. Jesper lies on his belly on the board and begins to paddle. The water splashes against the board, waves crashing against it as Jesper climbs. The farther he paddles, the higher they get, and now he can no longer paddle over the crest of the waves. Before the bloating hump can lift him, Jesper pushes the sharp nose of the board under the water and dives in. The overcooled, icy water hits him in the face and the current coils around him, pulling him into an underwater vortex. The water burns his eyes like molten metal. Jesper's charcoal-black silhouette glides over the bottomless watery grave and pushes the glowing white strip of surfboard into the darkness.
   
    "What do they make you feel like? What's it like?" - finally asks Teresh, and while Charlotte and Annie explain to the boys about the heightening of all the senses and the feeling of ecstasy that's hard to put into words, it all comes over them little by little, like an anticyclone in a darkening sky. Khan is filled with a strange detachment from what is happening. He blinks his eyes behind the thick glasses, breathes steadily, and feels himself, his heavy body, his fat pads and his feverishly beating heart as if it were no longer a part of him. Moline moves graciously closer to Han, and they separate from the company.
    It's so nice to keep the peace in Han's quiet world, striped like the skyline. It now resembles the tricolor of Ilmaraa - a combination of disparate colors that the girl recalls when she looks at Khan - and it seems that the entire evening sky, cooling, becomes it. Moline tells the boy this, and at the same time warns him that there will be many more such revelations today. Later, when it works.
    "Very well," Khan shakes his head, getting closer and closer to his new self: the kind that the industrially manufactured empathogen makes him. For the coming night and for the rest of his life. If need be, he'll be back here, where everything is fine. Everything is under control. - Yes, by the way, these are the colors, the colors of the evening sky. Turquoise, purple and orange. They're so bright on the flag because Ilmaraa doesn't have the right shade of paint. They just don't occur there in nature. That's the problem, and the insanely bright sun that makes everything fade. You might think the Ilmarans have bad taste. But really it's the soils and the sun. They'd love to use calm colors, but they can't.
    Moline nods. "You know, sometimes I just don't have anything to say. Especially in conversations like this. I don't understand anything in color, but I really like the way you tell it. If anything, don't be offended that I don't say anything, okay?"
    "No, you don't have to make excuses. I already know it's all interesting: the paint situation in Ilmaraa, the old balloons, and even the yoga I told you about when I saw you off. I don't need to talk about it." - They laugh, quietly, as if hiding their jokes from the others. Eventually Han shuts up and turns to the ocean again, his chin up, "Can you tell me what it's like? What does it feel like? When you catch a buzz."
    "I don't know how it comes out that way, but my mood gets color," Moline explains, and Han nods with dignity. - I'd say it's black. It's very dark. It's a very pleasant darkness."
    Han nods again. He is slowly beginning to enjoy this new way he has just discovered. He wants the whole world to tell him everything. About everything. And Han would nod modestly in response, expressing his humble appreciation. Inayat Khan's appreciation. This is no joke. He feels his palms sweat, his hands go numb. Moline says that's the way it should be. It's perfectly normal. It means it's coming. It's going to start soon.
    Khan suddenly looks at the creature beside him with fervent concern, and the creature looks back at Khan - wishing him well from the bottom of her heart. The girl trembles slightly, she clenches her teeth and crumples the bedspread in her sweaty palms. Behind Moline Lund's dark green eyes miraculous thoughts flare, the branching synaptic network of her serotonergic neurons reconfigures. The established order is reversed, a terrible phenomenon that is called original sin, mood swapping, the ability to reverse serotonin uptake. That chemical cycle that teases Moline Lund day after day with its sparingly measured sweets - at school in the morning and at homework in the evening - now no longer works. And, as if that weren't enough, the neurons pump out the excess with unnatural generosity. The girl is all soaked in the sweet juice of these black, mascara-like overripe bunches, a pure liquid buzz. The guitar pop of the fifties in the portable record player goes silent now and then begins to sound again. The transport squirrels are busy pumping pleasure--in such quantities that neither body nor mind has time to react properly.
    "I'm scared," Moline says suddenly. - Something isn't right, it was different last time. I can hear you now, and everything else is just spinning around. It seems... I don't know what I think." - The girl's breathing picks up noticeably. She turns her back to her older sister and speaks quietly over her shoulder: "It's hot. Lotte, help me take off my dress, please."
    "What, already?! - Charlotte glances at her watch, unzipping Moline's dress with her other hand. - A full fifteen minutes more. Of course, maybe it worked earlier this time..."
    Moline's voice is weak and intermittent: "I'm dizzy, I can't see anything..." - She raises her hands.
    "It's nothing," Han says calmly, not losing his composure. The more difficult the situation, the more nonchalant Khan becomes. He still blinks his eyes slowly, inhales and exhales. The sea air is filled with coolness, and in front of his eyes lies the undulating ocean, so vast and serene. - If you feel dizzy, you should close your eyes," Han says, and decides it would be gentlemanly not to look in that direction, at least for now. The polka dot dress rustles in the air like a wrap as Charlotte slips it over Moline's head in one motion.
    The girl sighs faintly, "Oh, my God, it's so scary... Oh, my God..." She sinks to the ground at her sister's feet, the curve of her bright red lips moving in the darkness: "Here we go..."
    Han couldn't help but stare anymore. Moline's crown of hair spreads over the lush folds of Charlotte's dress, her swimsuit-clad body glowing hotly in her sister's lap, her pupil holes open in mydriasis - huge black circles without a trace of iris. The other five sit in a circle around her, and Moline looks up at Khan.
    "Why are you so calm?" - she asks.
    Han looks away from the girl's soft body, from the feverish movement of her arms and legs. He looks out at the cold waves of the North Sea, in which the sun has sunk. Dark ridges of clouds dissolve into the air like ghosts.
    "I don't know," says Inayat Khan, taking off his fogged-up glasses and habitually wiping them with his handkerchief. - I thought that's how it worked. That for a while it would be like this, abnormally calm.
    Charlotte strokes Moline's head. "Maybe my first time was quiet, too. Are your palms sweating?"
    "I always have them sweating, Charlotte. But yes, I think they're sweating now, too.
    Moline wraps herself in her sister's dress like cool sheets. She buries herself in it, in the cradle, in the crib; the dress crunches like starched linen, such a pleasant, fresh smell... Her body is only thirteen years old, but rivers of oxytocin already spill out in the red twilight of her central nervous system, like in postpartum bliss. Confidence and tenderness overwhelm her barely appeared mammary glands, the orgasm hormone rises like dough in the warmth of fatty tissue, the girl is drenched in blush in the waves of this care. She loves everyone. Annie watches with envy as she wriggles: "Wow, you feel good!"
    "My God, it feels so good," Moline exhales. - You have no idea how good it feels. Please say something nice, it resonates so much. I'm afraid it would be too sad without it."
    "This is what can happen," Charlotte nods regally. She puts her palm to Moline's chest, just in case, and pulls her hand away in horror, like from a hot stove. - My, my, how your heart beats! It's like hoofbeats, listen!" Annie leans over and puts her ear to her sister's chest. - Moline, tell me honestly how many pills you took!"
    "Two," Moline lies. She didn't eat two, she ate six. With one hand she strokes Annie's silky hair, and with the other she catches Han's hand in the air. She presses hers to her chest, too, needing closeness, and whispers: "It's all right, really, it's just the way it should be, God, it feels so good..." she shakes her head slowly, as if recoiling from the waves of heat and cold; they rise in rage before her, biting their oars. Matter is rampant, wreaking havoc. - I've never felt so good in my life, everything is so soft, touch it..." - Moline presses the boy's hand even tighter against her ribs, the circle of sitters around her growing tighter. Spreading his shoulders, Khan sits above the commotion: he looks at the girl with his chin up proudly, and an indescribable peace reigns in his heart. He had felt it before, but the feeling grew stronger and more apparent with each passing moment. The swarthy boy looks down, his eyes magnified by the thick lenses of his glasses, now completely black. He is a real Khan, a Cerberian lion, the leader of nations.
    "Moline, I think it worked on me, too. It's magical," he squinted.
    "I'm the one who infected you!" - the girl is drenched in color and smiles heartily at her firstborn. Han exhales and feels his breath, frighteningly warm, touch the girl like a sword blade, and the world around him joyfully rings with the darkest black. The atmosphere vibrates as if a noise filter had been removed, a swarm of migrating locusts chirping, clawing at the threads of which everything is woven. This trembling beat pervades everything, and in the soft depths beneath Han's hand, in the warm darkness of Moline Lund's body, the alarm sounds.
   
    A crazy motorcycle racer hits the wheel of a motorcycle cart in his heart, standing in front of the house. The longer it goes on, the worse it gets, high pitches swarming in my ears. Shut up for a minute, let Kenny figure out why third gear won't engage. Now that's something to worry about. He stares at the creased door of the old wooden mansion, and the world, along with the snowflakes floating in the air, goes still for one crystal-clear moment. The gable of the house towers above it, black against the dark blue sky, all is calm, all is quiet. Grounding. A silvery trickle of exhalation escapes from Kenny's mouth into the winter silence.
    Seventy years earlier, Nadia Harnancourt steps from the railing of the bridge into the void, her magnificent ball gown turned inside out, the fabric fluttering in flight. She falls, head thrown back, straight as a stick; her underskirt flutters white jellyfish, and through it the operetta star casts her last glimpse of the world. The River Vera is lapping over her with a splash, a mercurial stream in a lace of foam. And from the distant distance, as if from childhood memories, comes the ringing of bells.
    Inayat Khan and Teresh Maciek walk out the door of the mansion. The tall ex-agent looks around in wonder at the silence. It is so pleasant to watch the snowflakes dance in the light of the forgotten candle he still holds in his hand. Kenny waves them away from his motorcycle carriage, pressing his other hand to his heart with relief.
    They take a couple of steps, Teresh manages to hear the crunch of snow under their boots, as suddenly low pitches explode behind them. Kenny watches as the two men frightenedly look back at the house. The deafening beat rumbles, the window panes shaking to the rhythm of its bass.
   
    Little Teresh dances, self-consciously, like a jikut shaman. He shakes his fingers in the air, numb and soft, and the world whispers around him. A swooping wind rustles in the reeds and cools his bare torso and his forehead glistening with sweat. The goodness of the world is boundless, the South Graad massacre never happened, Frantisek the Brave returns and leads the revolutionary army of the SNR, and white banners fly over them. Teresh can ask anything of this world, but he dares not even look at what is now before him. It no longer belongs to this world. In the black mirror of his hearing from "Mono," only the low frequencies of the bass drum sound. The boys made a shelter for themselves in the reeds. All six of them liked the idea. "Let's go there, yes, let's go, let's make a nest!" - they shouted in unison.
    Khan lights the gas lamps in the darkness. The smell of gas crawls over the olfactory receptors, nasty as a slug. A flash of the lighter and the lamp flickers on, blue tongues of flame dancing under the glass, thin shadows of children falling on the reeds around it. Khan looks at the fruits of his labor, and he likes what he sees. He likes the way the shadows of the flames dance on Moline's cheeks. And he's not afraid to tell her that, and the girl is grateful to him for it. Moline Lund flutters about on Charlotte's dress in her white swimsuit - adulterated, overripe. Her brain can no longer process the flood of pleasure-giving substance, but her body tissues keep delivering more and more. Now the substance beats up the girl - violently, jealously. And nothing in this feverish night portends peace. Another blow, precisely on target; Moline presses her hands to her body, her breath catching. The tactile pleasure of the fabric of her dress crunches in her lymph nodes, in her smooth armpits, rubbed to pink streaks against the jersey-trimmed bows-but her nerve endings have been numb long ago; too numb to feel anything. The senses are off the scale; the physical apparatus no longer takes the high. Water from the bottle in her hand spills out onto the bedspread, but no one notices, everyone is chattering around as if nothing had happened. Hot red spots have appeared on the insides of Moline's thighs, her head is droopy, her blackened eyes flash with the same frequency, in burnout mode. And all around, bouquets of lilies and chrysanthemums and red roses wilted in the sand.
    The girl crumples, her body can't take the strain. "Please calm me, I feel too good..." she mumbles, "and too sad.
   
    The operetta star opens her eyes so that the whites are visible: regret, suffocating glandular regret! What have I done, I am a fool, a fool! The icy water squelches in the lips-lungs of the lifeless narrative of Nadia. Of all that Nadia has done, all that remains in the story is an empty sleeve - shapeless, devoid of the warmth of her hand. It becomes a moulage, a speculation, and hardly anyone remembers who Nadia really was. None of these people have heard the "Officer's Wife" that made her famous, nor her scandalous number in "The Young Man's Girlfriend" - except as a historical curiosity. A ridiculous exaggeration of her era. She is forgotten, she has grown old, what use is a pretty dress now, for she has nowhere to go in it! But beyond the shimmering surface of the water, the lights are still just coming on. All is yet to come; here her favorite piccolo flutes and tinkling fanfares play - such a festive sound! The kettledrums roar, and the rumble of water in Nadia's ears sounds like a furor, an applause, a life, a hot, fervent rapture. She returns to the surface, and she is again surrounded by young, beautiful people. Now that's a real celebration, Nadia thinks. It looks like this world is going to end soon.
    "No," Frantisek the Brave says to her, "there are eight more years to go. What a handsome man, and what a look - like a steppe eagle's!
    "Eight years? So anything is still possible!"
    "Yes, anything is possible for this world," says Frantisek Brave.
   
    Annie, the younger sister, carefully, like a nurse, gives Moline water from a bottle, and Han pulls back the reeds with his hand, like a curtain, revealing the waves of the sea. He begins the story. In the darkness, a pair of silhouettes move against the wavering water. They dance. One frantically, the other in the same rhythm, but three times slower. Annie wraps her sister's flaming body in the cocoon of her dress. Charlotte herself got out of it long ago. Forty minutes ago, when she took another pill.
    She walks through the darkness to Teresh, who is dancing, and opens his eyes with her voice. The half-naked girl puts a bottle of water to the boy's mouth and says, "Hey, Teresh! You need to drink, or you'll get heat stroke. You too," she yells over her shoulder, "don't forget to drink water!" The boy takes the bottle and drinks greedily, his thirst insatiable. But the coolness of the water finally quenches it. A blissful chemical peace presses the boy to the ground. Distractedly, with her thumbs behind the elastic of her golden panties, Charlotte Lund wiggles her cocoon-free body in front of him. With her head slightly tilted back and her eyes closed, the girl nods to the beat of the bass drum. Suddenly a smile runs across her lips, and she laughs briefly. As if at a joke she alone understands. It breaks Teresha; it is also the other side that he has imperceptibly imagined. He hears the laughter wavering there, in the mysterious labyrinth of someone else's brain. What does it feel like to laugh with that laughter? It is no longer about something or over something, its reason can no longer be explained in words, it has long since disappeared, lost to Teresh.
    Maciek, dressed in his school uniform, walked down the stairs. How was he to know that only total losers in Vaasa wore school uniforms, kids who got pushed against the wall in the hallway? He had just arrived. Right in front of him was the eldest of the Lund sisters, her shoes clattering on the stone of the steps, and beside her walked her tenth-grade friend, Handsome Alexander, and his mouth never shut for a second. Teresh, like a shadow, followed them into the school cafeteria. Charlotte Lund herself never goes to the canteen; she does not eat, she does not need to exchange substances with the world. But Handsome Alexander draws her in. Eighth-grader Teresh Maciek stood behind Charlotte and poured himself a morsel. The girl turned around and reached for the morsel ladle. Teresh handed it to her. That's how it happened.
    "You're Charlotte Lund," Teresh muttered the girl's semi-mythical name.
    "And you?"
    "Teresh Macheek," said Teresh Macheek. And so it has remained ever since.
    The tips of Charlotte's brown hair stroke her shoulders as she shakes her head to the beat of the music. She raises her arms above her head, her fingers as thin as spider legs, intertwined in the air, and small bare breasts stick out below her collarbones, white in the frame of her tan. "Kaif, Teresh Macheek! - she laughs and happily shakes her head from side to side. -Я. Just now. Caught it. Kaif!" Down in the sand, where Teresh Macheek is kneeling, the girl rolls a dark blue golf ball with one foot off the other. Then, as she squats down, Teresh Macheek says to her: "Me, too." Waves of heat and cold pelt them. Gold panties glisten between the girl's white thighs, and Teresh looks at them. Disinterestedly, with childlike asexuality. Just, well... because it's beautiful. The boy and the girl roll on top of each other like dominoes knuckles. They are pure lust. It's just a game.
   
    Teresh, Han, and the crazy suru-racer stand in the yard and watch, heads tilted back, as Grey crawls toward the old house. There, inside, the mighty beats of a bass drum resound, and outside, beyond the silhouette of the mansion, the black woods along the entire horizon slowly wrap up to the sky. The grayness rises in a sheer wave over the spruce forests, over the mountain ranges at the edge of the sky. Its horror slowly creeps upon the world, with a rumble, but the world is made of matter, and the matter, evergreen, ancient, holds on with incomprehensible dignity and, disappearing, smiles - calmly and tenderly, as Frantisek Brave once smiled behind the garbage dump. Silently the teeth of its mountains turn black, the glades spread out and the frost-covered firs glisten under the stars.
    "I'm not K. Voronikin, but..." - Teresh grunts from the interior of the carriage. He scrambles around the seats. Han stands outside, leaning his foot on the carriage as Kenny does. "What - 'but'?"
    Teresh crawls out of the car with a bottle of berry wine in his hand. "I have a feeling, Han, that in half an hour there will be nothing but Gray here."
    "Että mitä? Mitä se sanoi?"
    "It's okay, Kenny. Don't listen to him. It's not like he's K. Voronikin or anything like that."
    Teresh crisply unscrews the cap from the berry wine and puts his hands on the bottle. It would be better if he were silent.
   
    "There is such an oceanographic legend. Killer waves," little Han points to the sea. All four look where he is pointing from the warm safety of the beach blanket. Insects buzz around the lanterns burning in the dark. - For a long time it was thought so: that it was just a myth, a sailor's tale. They even had a mythological name in the Ardian language: "galderdingr", "sorcerer's wave". But now it's a scientifically documented phenomenon, their existence has been proven, you see? It explains dozens, hundreds of ships that have disappeared without a trace. They are also called "lone wave", "Droepner wave" and - this is the name I like best - "mad wave". They appear as if out of nowhere, and yet are times higher than the other waves. That is, in a weak wave, the killer wave will also be relatively small. But ten-meter waves, for example, make the highest scientifically measured waves in the world. I've seen documentary footage of such a wave! - Han enthusiastically shakes his chin, demonstrating the improbability of what he has seen. - It was filmed on a Mesquite oil rig in the middle of the ocean. You have no idea what a monster it is!" - Han feels his tongue and mind working in perfect harmony. Everything comes out perfectly. The language may have been slanted, the mind unreliable, but not now! And now it will always be that way. He forgets to put his raised hand down. It still shows the terrifying height of the killer wave formed by the ten-foot waves.
    Moline watches as he points skyward. A faint flash of curiosity saves her from the grip of her own body. Now she knows what she needs. She needs to catch up. Just a little bit, and it will start all over again. Only even stronger. Gulping in air with her mouth half open, the girl greedily drinks water from the bottle. Her lips glisten with water. "Where do they come from?"
    "It's math, isn't it? - Jesper sits with his hand resting on his cheek. - Is there some mathematical rule that explains them?"
    "Exactly! - Han replies. - The nonlinear effect. I won't even pretend to understand what it is, but it doesn't matter! It turns out that a killer wave can form by itself from several smaller waves according to a certain formula. If they are moving in a large body of water, such as the ocean, there is a chance that at some point they will assemble into a nearly vertical, highly unstable monster wave. It absorbs the energy of the other waves, and the water around it becomes calm. Normal waves turn into ripples, and the killer wave immediately collapses under its own abnormal weight. But at the same time it can, um... if I may say so... wreak tremendous havoc. And do you know where these waves appear most often, all over the world? - Han ends his speech with a broad gesture. It's a phenomenon called the North Sea Autumn Wave.
    "Holy shit," Annie laughs: her tongue is slowly loosening, and she begins to swear. The girl's eyes have long since turned black with mydriasis. She looks out at the sea, from where she thinks a fucking wave could come at any moment. But only Teresh comes, and with him Charlotte.
    "You know what the most fucked up thing is?" - Han asks shyly. He wipes his diametrical glasses and puts them back on. The almond-shaped eyes behind the thick glasses squint, full of popular science mystery: "The same effect - don't ask me how, I don't know - but the same nonlinear effect explains Gray's behavior. It is used in entroponetics. It's the same way that Greyness behaves when it consumes the world."
    "Like tractor wheels," Charlotte says, looking into the boy's eyes. - Wow, that feels good. By the way, Han, can I tell you something?"
    "Yes, you can," the young Inayat nods.
    "You're extremely smart for your age."
    Charlotte's voice is royally sincere. Khan feels crowned by her compliment.
    "And you have very, very good posture," he replies, and the girl laughs heartily.
    The crossfire of admiration and appreciation rumbles like an ocean, shaking and lighting up everything around, as suddenly Annie emerges from the very center of it. She moves nimbly, like an otter, swiveling her head around as if looking for something. "Hey," she says, "do you have any water left?" Jesper doesn't notice that Annie's gaze is on him and everyone is waiting for his answer. He is still staring mesmerized at the sea, sliding his white sailor's cap to the back of his head. He doesn't feel anything special, his head is quite clear-just hot. Jesper is a little disappointed. There's no romance either. But the story about the killer waves turned out to be quite good.
   
    A man in a wetsuit, panting, dives to the surface. He spits out the icy water and crawls belly-first onto his surfboard. A lone black dot named Jesper splashes at the mercy of the waves half a kilometer offshore. He looks at the chronometer on his hand: another quarter hour, and the hypothermia will become critical. He needs to rest. Jesper tries to relax his lactic acid-shaking muscles. He looks back, where a strip of pine forest can be seen behind the beach of Charlotteville, and above it the cloud towers slowly crumble in the overcast sky. The plank rises and falls on the chest of the body of water, to the rhythm of his breathing.
    And suddenly everything goes quiet. Where are all my waves?
   
   

Forever and ever, those four legendary, terrible, last words:
    Why did you leave me?
    I remain true to myself, I call out to every god like a wave:
    You won't leave me this time? You won't leave me?
    You're not going to leave me, are you?

   
    A monstrous roar approaches. Jesper rises to his feet on his board, slides his rubber helmet to the back of his head, and looks in that direction; a blond strand sticks to his cheek. In front of the tiny sliver of his surfboard rises the dark gray wall of a giant wave. It is like a cell membrane. It stands upright, a foamy ridge covering Jesper's sky, spray flying. A sprawling wave lifts the board on its croup. The famous designer paddles as hard as he can. He tries to turn on the wave.
    But the guilderdingr moves at breakneck speed.
   
    "That's too bad," Annie sighed sympathetically. - You could have been so good."
    They stand under a streetlight, on an asphalt road, and where the asphalt goes into the sand, the big beach of Charlotteyal begins. Forty-five minutes of forest darkness and intoxicating chitchat are behind us. How nice it was to talk like this, alone.
    Jesper puts the canister under the dark red water pump and begins to pump. The water sings, filling the vessel. "Well, I'm not offended, it was really nice talking to you, honestly. And the others, I think, really enjoyed everything, too. Well, sort of. Really, Han's acting like he's found some kind of cosmic calm, and Moline..."
    "Moline is ripe."
    "Right. I think that's the right word," Jesper twists the lid of the canister and fills two bottles with water. Slipping them into his pockets, he looks questioningly in Annie's direction. A gnat beats desperately against the glass of the street lamp, under which the girl rubs her bare feet one against the other. The gas lamp swings in her hand. The thin fuzz on the girl's bare feet shines in the electric light. She smiles: it was her smile that caused Jesper to ask that question, as if Annie's mouth had transmitted it directly to his brain.
    "I get it! - Annie says. - I guess you had to smell it. You're the perfumer, aren't you?"
    Jesper squats in front of the girl: on the pavement between them, in the middle of the mirrored insert in Annie's purse, a single pill glistens.
    "We need something hard to grind," the girl says, and when a joyful Jesper comes running back carrying her stone, she is already holding a box of shadows in her hand.
    "But thanks anyway!" - Annie diligently crushes the pill on the mirror and rubs the shards into a soft crimson-red powder. She licks the edge of the box, then carefully pulls a five-real bill from her purse. Jesper watches this ritual with excitement. Meanwhile, Annie folds the black bill in half and divides the powder with it into strips on the mirror peephole. They cross it parallel, like rails. The five-real coin rolls up into a tube in the girl's fingers.
    "Here. Now you clamp one nostril with your finger, like this, and put this in the other," she shows Jesper the tube. - And you pull the track into your nose, all of it, in one long breath. I'll show you!"
    Annie-Elyn Lund kneels under a street lamp, next to a water pump. The asphalt sparkles, the girl bends over the mirror. Jesper, in his white sailor suit, watches as she diligently draws a strip into her nostril. The powder disappears into the paper tube - instantly, in one greedy breath. It seems utterly fantastic to Jesper. Annie tilts her head back and holds out the bill to him. "It stings a little. But it's even nice. It also makes them work faster. It doesn't last as long, though. Go ahead, try it!"
    And Jesper tries it. The drug powder swirls up the black tube from the banknote. The crystals tear the capillaries, and my nostril burns and itches. And when Jesper rises, it is so quiet and beautiful around him. They walk down into the woods together, the gas lantern hissing in Annie's hand, and in its light the trunks, straight as poles, cast long, wobbly shadows on the dark hills.
   
    Jesper smoothly pushes off the board, rising to his feet. The rumble of falling water can be heard behind him, and the designer presses his heel against the keel of the board. Everything goes flawlessly: in an instant the resistance is minimal, he is now gliding on the surface. The board no longer touches the water, it glides on a vibrating cushion of air; Jesper zigzags up and down the slope, then back up to the crest of the wave. He hears it collapse behind him, breaking under its own weight. A giant glistening water curtain falls, pulling him inward. Jesper slows down, allowing him to do so, and plunges into the semi-darkness of the underwater tunnel, where a world that becomes possible only for a brief moment-a complex, hard-to-describe dynamic pattern-finds permanence in its fall. The wave collapse is an unchanging environment, a dusky almond-shaped cavity in a furious swirl of water. It is calm and quiet inside. If it could last forever, it would be the summer of the fifty-second year.
    The summer of fifty-second is an eternally crumbling object, it consumes Jesper alive. There is something wrong with this thread of memories. Terribly wrong. It's as if they weren't supposed to be there, the world rejects them. But now, for those ten seconds, everything comes into balance. Jesper strokes the water wall with his hand, and his mouth, flushed with cold, repeats a single word: "Please!"
   
    In the courtyard, where wheel tracks loop in the snow, Inayat Khan stands looking up, and above him, like a ghost, hangs one of the outbuildings. A trebuchet of electric wires hangs from the rotating object, black against the starry sky. Calmly and independently it floats straight into Grayness, and furniture and pieces of foundation follow it in a chain. Khan sees Teresh and Kenny, heads back, wandering mesmerized through the yard behind the object until they stumble upon a wooden fence.
    In a strange, fear-deprived excitement, everyone looks in the direction of Ulvi's dilapidated dwelling. It seems that every quiet crackle is coming from there, from its limestone foundation. That it is about to rise into the air. But nothing happens. The grayness dies down in the distance behind the houses, the crackling of the trees fades, and the music in the big house fades. Somewhere at the edge of visibility, at the upper edge of the frozen Grayness, the hut disintegrates and disappears. Ulv, wet with sweat, appears in the doorway and smokes a menthol cigarette. He is not wearing a jacket. Wearing gym pants and a silver T-shirt, the young man stands in the doorway, surrounded by a cloud of steam. He shakes his curly head and drops of sweat spread from him. Teresh and Han rush toward him across the courtyard, and Easy-Cheel, after a moment's hesitation, looks back frightened.
    "Here you go! - Ulv shouts, running out to meet them, envelopes in hand. He waves toward Grey and slips the papers to Han. - Go away! Now!"
    The engine roars to life, and snow flies from under the wheels of the carriage. The gray wall can no longer support its ghostly weight. It collapses. In the blink of an eye, Greyness covers the clearings, blowing up snow dust, its avalanche like a shockwave, pummeling the world. The spruces bend under its impact, the windows in the shabby old house are blown out. It circles the house, as if in indecision, and a moment later closes in around it. The grayness swallows the mansion, and in the meantime, somewhere inside, in a low-ceilinged hall, a young man puts on his headphones. He reads the immeasurable Greyness like a magnetic reader - a stereo-8 tape. And the only trace of the Lund sisters that passes before him on this lifeless cast is some Jesper's strange impossible memory of them.
    The grayness rolls across the fields on either side of the clearing. An avalanche of it crashes into the gravel, the swirling wall looming, crimson red in the taillights of the motocaret. The chain-linked wheels rattle on the gravel. "Menee-menee-menee-menee-menee!" **, shouts the mad rider-suru, chasing the car like a horse. He presses on the gas pedal already lying on the floor - as hard as he can, as if that can make the carriage go even faster. And looking at the speedometer, you'd think it would! In the yellow light of its scale, Teresh watches as the arrow trembles at the number two hundred. Han looks sideways and sees Grey. It moves silently but surely behind the windows. Its proximity dims the electric light in the cabin. Han's glasses fog up; pressed by acceleration against the back of the leather seat, he clutches two envelopes to his heart. I can't see the tears of joy in his eyes behind the foggy lenses.
    "I was right, Teresh, I was always right," he says, but Teresh can't hear him. The engine roars too loudly.
   
    Jesper and Annie walk across the field in the light of the gas lantern. Jesper now carries both the canister and the lantern, while Annie carries only her blouse. In the light of the blue flame, Jesper reads the birthmarks on her bare back. Only the thin ties of her swimsuit cover them now. How pleasantly the wild rut rustles, softly touching her shins below her short pants. Thirsty, Jesper sips water from the bottle. "It's just delicious! Delicious water! - he says. - It should be bottled and sold!"
    On the shore, they are joyfully greeted by other thirsty people. Everyone embraces. Annie wipes lipstick off Jesper's lips in the light of a gas lantern and laughs. Teresh puts Han on his shoulders and pretends to be a robot. Han turns his friend's head, he makes a robotic sound and goes where Han leads him. Chasing the robot Teresh knee-deep in the sea, Khan slips into the water. He barely has time to admire the jellyfish as the others are already running towards them in their bathing suits.
    The little children's bodies, white in the dark, plunge into the water. The sand crumples beneath their bare feet, the silky water splashes around their ankles. Supersensitive from the substance, bodies react to every touch. Tiny sand fountains rise between Annie's toes, she moves them with pleasure and steps forward cautiously. Everyone walks very slowly, raising their hands above the cold film of surface tension. From time to time they shriek, trying to save every second before the ecstasy of their myrrh anointing. And the myrrh, splashing around their thighs and bellies, moves itself toward them - cool and perfectly viscous. Moline can't stand it. As soon as the water wetters her breasts and armpits, the girl plunges headlong into it. Only a hopeless moan remains above the surface of the sea. She runs her fingernails into her palms, feeling something in her immediately begin to crumble. She can no longer hold it in. Hormones are already distorting her pliable body, the bones of her pelvis have pulled apart in preparation for childbirth, unbearable bliss pulsing deep within her womb. In the abyss of her bodily fluids, a tiny homunculus closes its eyes the size of a pinhead. The beastie, curled up in a semi-circle, opens its mouth in a cry. But nothing is heard, not a sound, she was never here. Moline relaxes, it feels so incredibly good here underwater, so dark and everything echoes. Charlotte's glowing white shadow glides by, Moline feels someone's soft hands on her shoulders. It's Han. He pulls the girl upstairs. Moline inhales the salty air and remains lying on the surface. Water runs from her hair, and an infinitely detailed garland of stars, like splashes of milk, shines in the black sky above her. All six of them throw their heads back and bob on the waves, lined up in a semicircle. Around them, in the black mirror of the water, the stars shine, too. They twinkle faintly, blurred. Only in the glasses of Inayat Khan they are reflected in all their sparkling clarity.
    "They're not there anymore," Han feels the vibration of the voice under his hands. He lowers his gaze, and the stars slip from his glasses. Moline Lund's eyes take the place of the stars, and the darkness in her mouth moves, taking the form of the words, "but I can still see them."
   
    In the morning they awoke in their reed nest, like a litter of kittens, and neatly gathered up the garbage. In the blinding light of the sun, they put their clothes back on, dried by its rays. Their eyes ached, and the world around them seemed welcomingly unfamiliar. Everything had already been said yesterday, in the darkness of the night, and there was no point in repeating it in the light of day. Smiling awkwardly, exchanging short phrases tiredly, they reached the streetcar stop. There they agreed to meet in the last week of August. The girls were just about to return from Graad, where they were going as a family. They could not give an exact date for their return, but they promised to call and send postcards. At this meeting, among other things, they planned to discuss how to behave now at school, and in the real world in general.
    There were no kisses or anything like that at the stop. But there were many looks, full of regret for separation, and inconspicuous bodily messages. The girls got on the streetcar, and the boys went to Father Teresh's cottage. It was the last time they saw each other.
   
    ___________________________
    *What is it? What did he say?
    ** Go, go, go, go, go, go!
   

▲
14. LIST OF MISSING
⬍
14. LIST OF MISSING
   
    Twenty years later, near Vaasa, the fugitives are caught in a traffic jam. Isola Katla, a total area of sixty million square kilometers, has just lost six percent of its territory; a light board over the freeway warns: "All lanes for entry only. The red river of taillights glistens in the autumn night, and somewhere in the middle of it, in a gigantic traffic jam, stands the car in which Teresz Maciek has long been asleep. Steam rises from under its hood, splash marks curve on the body like the branches of a parabola. The nickel-plated gills of the engine elements gleam from beneath the black body plates. Inayat Khan is curled up in a ball on the seat. He is still awake. He is savoring every second - despite, and precisely because he is deathly tired. The leather upholstery creaks around him, the noise of the editorial blimps coming through the sweet half-dream outside. Propellers chirp quietly in the distance, the dark maelstrom of sleep beckons and whirls. Khan plunges in and out as he pleases. Occasionally the car moves off and advances a couple of meters. Then the desaparetic opens his eyes and sees Kenny walking by. The mad rider-suru is chatting with other drivers and scraping ice off the windshield. There's something about this moment that Han realizes: he's going to miss him. He already longs for the diamond glow of the headlights, the bloody glow of the taillights in the oil smoke, the knowledge that everything will be all right.
    Twenty years had passed since the last time he had felt something like this. Limitless possibilities. Back then, they were waiting for the Graad girls together. Outside the world, under Han's closed eyelids, God's kingdom begins. He presses his hands to his chest, embracing the invisible. All these spaces, expanses, abandoned fields and roadsides are opportunities. Opportunities to spend time together. Conversations habitually branch off in Han's head, in the darkness of his locker of thoughts. There Moline Lund walks with him, listening, nodding, asking questions. Laughs at his jokes - for twenty years now. They sit on the side of the highway, she doesn't mind. Her body hasn't changed since then, she still looks like a child, but her soul has been there for Han the whole time. She's grown up, matured. She became serious and mysterious and sad.
    Two months passed, but the meeting scheduled for the end of August did not take place. The girls returned to Vaasa on August fifteenth, but never called. Why they did not, and why they had gone to the beach in Charlottesville three times in that time, remained a mystery.
    The midday sun dotted the walls in stripes through the blinds. The air in the living room of the diplomatic cottage was still, something hanging in it, preventing me from breathing. It was a vacuum, a sense of loss, a terrible, intolerable anxiety. After waiting by the phone for a couple of weeks, they finally decided to call the girls themselves. The three of them stood in the living room. Teresh hung up the phone.
    "What is it? - Han worried. - Aren't they home?"
    "Their mother picked up the phone. - Teresh sank into the chair with a puzzled look. - Said they'd gone to the beach."
    "What beach?"
    "Charlottesville.
    "What? Why didn't they call?"
    "I don't know, I think something happened..."
    And then there was that argument. The one that two days later, Teresch attacked Jesper over. He wanted to run to the beach right away, Han was already tying the laces on his sneakers, but Jesper decided that wasn't cool. We'd have to wait and let them call. So it was settled, and fifteen minutes later, at one o'clock in the afternoon, Agneta, the ice cream lady, was the last person to see the Lund sisters. It was the twenty-eighth of August, International Day of the Disappeared.
   
    *****
   
    From that day on, everything stopped being "cool. Jesper tries to avoid the word, it sounds like an accusation. Frozen and panting, the designer falls with his back to the sand. Hypothermia. It smells like rotting reeds; reeds and wild ruttus cling to the ground. He is thirty-four years old. He presses his heels into the wet sand. How and why he survived is unknown. Why didn't he slip off the plank into the sea when his hands and feet cramped from the cold? When the wave came crashing in - how was he able to swim out?
    Overhead, in the dark autumn evening sky, the cumulus clouds drown each other. Slowly and smoothly. Jesper wraps his arms around his head and squeezes. His mouth, blue from the cold, opens slowly, a wheeze escapes his lungs, his stomach shakes convulsively in a fit of coughing. His heels leave furrows in the sand, his hands tremble, but nothing changes. He remembers everything. The fifty-second year is frozen inside his skull: a bizarre, impossible museum piece, a copy of a lost world. The fragrance grows sweeter - and still the same undeniable fact whose weight cannot be overestimated: you cannot go back there.   
    Through sleep I heard the approaching clatter of hooves on the black asphalt of the freeway. Jesper! Han wants to call him and tell him: get ready! It's for real now. But there's no phone booth here, it's dark in God's realm, and mounted policemen are scouring the highway between rows of carriages. A nightmarish silhouette stops by the window. Khan opens his eyes. Steam is coming from the horse's nostrils, it is snorting, and its damp black eyes stare at the half-asleep man. The mounted officer shines a flashlight into the cabin through the frozen glass and drives on. The horse walks away, clattering his horseshoes on the pavement, Han closes his eyes and falls asleep again. His arms are clasped to his chest, as if he is hugging someone.
    When they finally fell asleep, Han heard an ominous voice in his sleep. It was the night of that day, the night after the twenty-eighth of August, and with that voice a terror descended upon the earth. At first Han heard it in his sleep-as it approached, screaming at regular intervals:
   
    "May!
    Annie!
    Moline!
    Charlotte!"
   
    The boy woke up in the bedroom on the second floor. He saw Teresh's eyes wide with fear: he was standing beside the bed and shaking him. Khan was no longer asleep, but the world's worst missing list was still ringing out. Outside, in Charlotteal. Not in a dream, but in reality. The blood froze in Khan's veins.
    "Do you hear that?"
    "Yes," replied Teresh.
    They woke up Jesper. They threw their jackets over their pajamas and ran out into the courtyard. It was cold, and, for the first time this year, the smell of autumn was in the air. They stood in the garden and listened. Names sounded in the woods mixed with the barking of dogs. The boys ran through the apple orchard, past gooseberry bushes and on into the darkness of the pine forest. There were glimpses of flashlights and searchlights.
    These were the search parties.
   
    *****
   
    By the end of the fourth day, volunteers were involved in the search. There were hundreds of them. Everyone wanted to help in some way, to take part in the common cause. Thousands of calls came in to a specially organized hotline. Leaflets were printed and programs were launched. The press and radio were on the ropes, and the very next morning the girls' photos were on the front pages. The headlines were full of the most vile sentimentality: "Mother in despair: children, come home!" Author columns discussed the possibility of reinstating the death penalty, and a wringing of tears mingled with paranoid vindictiveness: "Who took the children from their mother?" This sympathetic hubbub, in which the grief of the boys themselves was completely lost--all the weeping and gnashing of teeth--made them feel powerless in its midst, devalued them. It was only a vague feeling then, but now Jesper had enough words to explain what angered him. Idle curiosity. Somewhere out there, beneath the foam of indignation, the greasy commoner saw with a special sense of sweet horror all that was being done to the girls. There, behind a black curtain behind which Peter Peterson would not dare look with his own eyes, he looked through a newspaper article. He imagined himself there, a Man, he bit into a meat pie, and he liked what he saw. But when Jesper, in his thirteen years, watched his female classmates, it was an indescribable mystery, an alien realm of bodies. The curve of their backs, their naked arms, even less was enough. He was still disgusted by adult sexuality. To him, it is the bliss of the jaded. And, ironically, it actually makes him a pedophile.
    When the trendsetter, dressed in a wetsuit, enters the lobby of the Havsenglar, the woman at the front desk immediately hangs up. The famous designer shows up in the middle of the night, dripping, leaving sandy footprints on the woven carpet. Frozen half to death, the man looks so miserable that the receptionist, forgetting the call, hurries to wrap him in a terrycloth bath sheet.
    "No, I don't need an ambulance," Jesper waves back, gritting his teeth. - No, no tea either! No currant tea either! - He calls for the elevator, and after the button lights up, he still keeps pressing it with his finger stiffened by the cold. - No, no need, I'll take a bath, a hot bath."
    "Monsieur de la Gardie," the woman huffs. She pushes the toe of her shoe through the closing doors of the elevator. - There was a call for you, some Olle..."
    "At night? Why?"
    "According to an ad in the newspaper."
   
    *****
   
    The volunteers were the first to disband, then the search parties and everyone else left. The pine forest, where the boys wandered idly, was autumnally quiet. The bloodhounds no longer barked, the border guards no longer combed the shore of the bay. And everywhere they went they were met by emptiness, as if its very spirit had broken free. Everything was abandoned, unnecessary: the changing booths, the half-empty deserted beach. The streetcars came to a stop, empty or half-empty, the doors swung open and shut again. The last to leave were the creepy divers, three weeks later. And the boys saw a slow surrender everywhere. They knew exactly what that meant, though none of them ever dared to say the word out loud. Together they made the most fantastic plans. They imagined the glittering triumph of their return.
    The school year had officially begun a month ago, and a joint decision of concerned parents finally sent them to school. There, pictures of the girls, flowers, and storm lanterns on the porch awaited them. There was ostentatious grief in the school hallways, too. Everyone knew them in one way or another, everyone was vying for attention and measuring their grief. The boys again felt as if they were gone. They dared not tell anyone about what had happened over the summer. Finally they opened up to the police woman who came to the school, and the result was that among the more than two hundred interrogated was Sigismund Berg, a boy who by then was already a "well-known figure" in the juvenile department. This betrayal did not bear any fruit, and when a policewoman later came to talk to the principal in late November, all three ran away from the classroom. The stomp of their changing shoes echoed through the halls. She was their only link to the investigation, to that heartless bureaucratic machine. They stopped her at the door and pestered her until the poor woman realized there was no choice.
    "We have to get used to the idea that the girls are dead," she said.
    Lanterns and photographs were removed from the school porch, the death penalty was never returned. Even Vidkun Hird was given life imprisonment. He was arrested a year after the alleged kidnapping of the girls on suspicion of similar crimes, and the press was quick to link it to the Lund sisters. Mather himself made relevant allusions. He said something about cubs wandering too far away from the bear, and similar hirdisms. It was the only thing the boys could discuss when the three of them got together. That, or another topic the fickle curiosity of the press slipped them: if not Heard or the recently published list of sex offenders, the letter Carl and Ann-Margret Lund received two years after their disappearance, the details of his graphological examination, or, for example, the sensitivist who claimed the girls' bodies were buried under the foundations of the Ringhalle Hockey Stadium. As the articles came out less and less frequently, the meetings became so hopeless that each of the boys began to avoid them in their own way. Jesper slowly began surfing, getting into sports. In tenth grade, Han first had to repeat the year, and then he dropped out of school altogether, and at the beginning of eleventh grade, Teresh left back for Grad.
    The press did not finally lose interest in the Lund sisters until fifteen years later. The investigation had long since ceased, and the investigators had retired. There were no more reasons to get together, and each retreated to his personal life. Jesper found himself an underage model and pretended not to recognize Han with his blue tie when he saw him in a restaurant. Teresch came to Charlotteville every year, alone. He didn't call the others. And Khan was finally immersed in the blue-smoky world of disappearances, holed up in the basement of his parents' house and flicking the lights of the airship that had disappeared a century and a half ago there, keeping his eyes on it.
    "Get used to the idea that fuck you ha hui."
    The end of the world. At the entrance to the city, the dark arches of the checkpoint rise. The barriers go up. The inspectors' vests and stripes on the barriers glow lemon yellow. The motorcade takes its place in line, everything moves smoothly and evenly. The honey-colored purr of the radio airwaves tells of the atomic bombs dropped on Revashol three hours ago. Khan is warm, the announcer's voice pleasant and steady. Rows of lanterns rise above the road; topped with frosty halos, they float by under the dark blue morning sky. He drifts toward them, toward his hometown, which he will leave tomorrow night. There is only one thing left to do. The light of the lanterns dims. Han watches as the ghostly outlines of buildings appear against the sky in the early morning light.
   
    *****
   
    The bedroom smells of lilies. Outside, outside the window of the country house, it is blue, and the bare chestnuts move their bony fingers of branches. She gets up early in the morning and leaves her husband to finish his nap in bed with a sleep mask on his face. The woman is fifty-two years old, with delicate features and cheerful wrinkles in the corners of her eyes; the dark green eyes themselves do not give away her age at all. Putting on her robe, she walks down the wooden staircase and makes herself a coffee. In the cool rooms of the wooden house, the light is off in the spacious kitchen. She loves those blue mornings, when the house is so quiet you can hear field mice scrabbling under the floor. A thin hand with pointed fingers presses the plunger of a coffee press. Even the smell of mildew from the floorboards began to please her over time, though it scared her so much at first-seventeen years ago when she first moved here. And the silence! It's so quiet here in the village, but over time this solitude has become a blessing of sorts. She walks through the living room on the cold floorboards, the furniture around her can be seen in the semi-darkness: the elegance of the fifties, the paint peeling off the wood. The woman walks to the door, throws her husband's coat over her shoulders and slips her feet into his boots. Like this, gathering her gray hair in one simple movement, she walks out onto the porch.
    With a cup of coffee thickly steaming in the autumn cold, she stands for a moment, breathing in the air, and then sits down in her favorite wooden garden chair. With her leg over her leg, Ann-Margret Lund smokes her first cigarette of the day. She admires the dawn, the sun rising through the morning mist. Her well-tended garden peeks through the haze, the glass of the greenhouse gleams, the lawn is in view, and it is time to rake the leaves. That will be her first thing today. She extinguishes her cigarette butt in an ashtray from an overturned flowerpot and returns to the house.
    The children of beautiful parents are beautiful; the children of ugly parents are ugly. Ann-Margret sprinkles water on her still beautiful body in the downstairs shower room. It wasn't always like this: in the beginning she was as skinny as a scarecrow. Then she was just a girl and climbed fences and trees with the boys. Then the female hormones kicked in and grew a new, unfamiliar body on this relic. The bulges and curves of the object of admiration. Gradually she mastered the subtleties of handling it; she graduated from university, taught, fell in love, gave birth to three daughters. In three years, one in each year. They came away from her easily, like pearls from a shell. Her young body recovered, becoming the same as before. Her friends envied her, sleeping in her husband's arms without any shame. But later, when she joined the party, she had another child, her last. Her husband loved her, and did not turn his back on her when their youngest daughter permanently disfigured her. While her body succumbed to earthly attraction, her mind rushed upward - toward a career, a place in the ministry. But now Ann-Margret Lund stands in front of the mirror, and though her skin has lost its former firmness and, to some extent, its fresh color, her hips are narrow again and her legs are slender. Everything has come back together, but this time, looking at her body, she feels not relief, but awe. Even though this feeling of loneliness, silence, peace, and the smell of mold had secretly taken her over, making her her new sanctuary. She became a void. But when Ann-Margret sees it all, she still gets scared. It's as if everything that made her a woman has somehow disappeared.
    Trying not to think about it, she quickly wipes herself off, puts on a beige suit, and walks out.
    A woman rakes dry leaves in the garden. When she came to school at the end of the first semester, the boys secretly watched her. It was the end of the first semester without her daughters, and Ann-Margret came to empty their lockers. A circle of deference formed around her; the children shunned her. Only Teresh, Jesper, and little Inayat watched from around the corner as the woman put the trinkets her daughters had left behind from last year into cardboard boxes. She rolled up a pop band poster, and gold stars fell from her hands to the floor. None of the boys told the others why they had come to follow her. But secretly they wanted to hug her, go to her house together, look at the girls' rooms. And then make plans to find them. These were childish fantasies. They wanted to play a special, important role in all of this, and if anyone had the power to give it to them, it was the girls' beautiful mother. It never happened, but then they did come to see her, one by one-though they kept it a secret from each other. They scouted out where her country house was, and awkwardly expressed their condolences to her. Then they exchanged news of the investigation, and Ann-Margret slowly remembered their names. Though the last time was eight years ago. Then, when Teresh and Han had already confessed, Jesper still lied that he had done nothing of the sort.
    "Come on, it's a mess," he said sarcastically.
    Ann-Margret walks between the overgrown gooseberry bushes, hangs her gardening gloves on the nail in the barn, and walks her husband to work. Karl Lund, the devoted industrial magnate, is still working hard, even though political instability and the resulting world economic crisis are undermining his business; so what if he has enough money to retire wherever he wants, even to Stella Maris. At half past eleven, a chauffeur arrives to pick him up; the luxury car disappears into the haze on the village road. Ann-Margret looks out into the street, where the crimson light of the taillights dims as her man drives farther and farther away.
    And with it, and the frightening morning ritual, all reminders of the fact that she once had four blond-haired, green-eyed daughters recede. One of them had brown hair and the other had tricolor eyes, but when the woman softly turns on the music and begins to move her shoulders to the beat, she can no longer tell which one had which. When the guilt dissipates and daylight streams in through the white lace curtains, Ann-Margret Lund becomes surprisingly light, she floats in the air. It is as if life has not been lived, and all these impressions, the little dents that one leaves on the surface of the world, have been, like hammers, straightened out by the rhythm of the music. She dances artlessly in the shadow of her genealogical tree, from which all the leaves have fallen. She no longer knows that the way she hides her lower lip under her upper lip as she smiles absently at the music is the way Charlotte did, too. She sweeps the floors, adjusts the tablecloths, and lines the rows of books on the shelves. She doesn't listen to the radio; she doesn't care about it. For Anne-Magret, the world has long since disappeared and left her here to do chores at home.
    She sits at the kitchen table, arms folded, watching her house sparkle. It's half past five, and the rooms are quiet and clean. Sometimes she dozes off like a cat in the afternoon, leaning her gray head over the table. She turned gray overnight, like Dolores Dei. Twenty years ago, on the morning of August twenty-ninth, she woke up completely gray. She listens to music through her sleep, light pours through the kitchen window on her hair, and in its flow it seems golden again for a moment. A woodpecker taps on the door like a woodpecker. Carl must have forgotten something, or come home early...but why would he knock? That someone came to visit seems unlikely. Hardly anyone comes in here now, and she likes that. Ann-Margret Lund adjusts her suit, smoothes her skirt wrinkled from sitting, folds her mouth into a smile, and opens the door.
    "Hello."
    Three men stand before her with embarrassed smiles on their faces: the first, insanely expensive dressed and smelling of aftershave for five hundred reals, tries not to show that he has a fever, but his blushing forehead gives it away; the second is wearing a dark orange windbreaker and a scarf in the colors of the Ilmaraa flag; and the third, skinny and tall, hurries to put out his cigarette. Though the connections seem obvious, she invites the men in and looks at them while they stand before her in their outerwear. Only when she notices the boyish timidity with which they shuffle from foot to foot and pick at the floor with the toes of their boots does she remember who she is dealing with. It reminds her of the behavior of her young suitors.
    "We have news," says Inayat Khan. - Yes, I know we shouldn't get our hopes up. But it is good news, Mrs. Lund.
    And when Mrs. Lund leads them into the kitchen, her hair turns silver in the half-light and her heart pours lead again.
    "Coffee? Tea?"
   
    *****
   
    Five hours earlier, Jesper sits in the Kino Café. In the light of day, he feels a little less projected among these glass walls and cubic furniture than usual. His head feels like it's absorbent cotton and his eyelids are terribly heavy. He wipes his sweat-covered forehead with a handkerchief with initials. The designer pulls down his sweater and immediately looks poorer. With just his shirt on, he begins to freeze again. The late autumn chill seeps through the glass walls and a mass of people move past. Jesper orders himself a green tea with honey and lemon.
    "I think I have a bit of a cold," he says to a man a few years younger than him. Jesper remembers him, it's little Olle. He was four grades younger than him. Jesper remembered him mostly for his brilliant talent for forgery. The seniors used his golden hands to forge all sorts of signatures, and the boy made good money - on all those diaries with D's and red notes that needed a parent's signature. Now little Olle has let go of his big brown mustache, and Jesper draws his own conclusions from it. Olle is a copywriter, and mustaches are back in vogue - in certain circles. In those where St. Miró, the luminary of nihilism, is considered a kind of exotic poet. Or, at least, was considered two days ago, when the country from which both St. Miró and the crazy retro mustache fashion originated had not yet used atomic weapons in another country.
    "Well, I guess this nihilistic fashion is over now," Jesper remarks in passing.
    Olle agrees fervently:
    "Yeah, you should have shaved it off, that mustache, I know... You know, the whole thing is such a brain blast... Excuse the expression, it's just that we too..."
    "Yes, yes, it's terrible," Jesper interrupts him halfway through. - "An absolute tragedy. Why did you call me, Olle?"
    "I read that ad and thought for a long time. You know, it was only when those bombs fell that I finally regretted it.
    "What the fuck, Olle? What the fuck is going on anyway? What are you sorry about?!"
    The mustachioed copywriter suddenly gets scared. Red as a beet, Jesper reaches across the table toward him. Olle hides his eyes, but his gaze is immediately caught by the albino tiger in the back of the café. Although the copywriter often comes here to make new acquaintances, he has never liked this creepy scarecrow.
    "Don't yell at me, I didn't do anything to them, I just wrote those letters."
    "Why in God's name did you do that?"
    "N-don't know," Olle stuttered. - I was just a kid, I really don't know why I did it. When it happened, they were all anyone talked about at school. I guess I just wanted to see what would happen. Whether anybody would realize it wasn't really Moline. One guy, Ziggy, brought me an old Moline notebook and asked if I could fake her handwriting. It seemed pretty easy to me, and I, well, decided to give it a try.
    "Did you send them, or did someone else?"
    "Sent by Zigi, I just wrote. Well, yes, I was stupid, understand, I was a boy, and, well, I thought I was a bit of a nihilist, too..."
    "And there's nothing else you can tell me about it? You don't know anything about them? Even if I went to the police after our conversation, for example, would you have nothing to add?"
    "Unfortunately, yes."
    Olle does seem genuinely sorry; he strokes his mustache nervously, and Jesper looks out the window at Östermalm with glazed, feverish eyes. Outside the window flows a crowd of darkly dressed people. Red-faced, he pulls on a sweater and removes his coat from the rack.
    "Idiot," he says, and leaves. Olle is left to pay the bill. When the check comes, the albino tiger still stares at him angrily.
   
    *****
   
    "Is this the good news?" six hours later, Ann-Margret asks and shakes off the ash from her cigarette. Streams of smoke rise from her and Terez Maciejek's mouths, and a steady, light gray light oozes from the sky. She and the three men sit on the veranda around the wooden table, and a gust of wind drags the white leaves across the floor.
    Jesper, who has finished his speech, becomes uncomfortable. But Han picks up on it:
    "No, that's not all! But look, isn't it wonderful that two decades later, in this world environment, something new still pops up. It means there's still time. And I have a feeling that now that we've found it, everything else is about to come out, too. Something like that is in the air."
    The ex-minister sits straight back, gracefully putting her leg over her leg. She remains silent, waiting, and this cools Khan's enthusiasm. He takes a sip of the coffee grounds left in his cup. Or rather, he pretends to sip. There's nothing there but viscous sugar.
    Khan continues:
    "I don't know what you'll think about it. I don't know how seriously you're going to take it..."
    "I, for one, don't take it seriously," Jesper inserts.
    "Anyway," Han continues with some indignation, "I'll tell you up front what I'm taking. Seriously, I mean. We've just come from Lemminkäise, from, um, an independent consultant. He's quite famous, although he doesn't advertise his activities. Easy-" Teresh makes a warning gesture, and Han corrects himself, "His name is Ulv. You've heard of him?"
    "I don't think so."
    "People come to him with things for which you can't find information anywhere else. Hopeless cases. He's been involved in at least twelve deaths. He's always helped in one way or another. Generally speaking, the police don't talk about it, but Teresh will tell you it's true.
    The former Macheek agent nods. He feels the woman's gaze on him and tries his best to behave with her as he would in the service with the relatives of the missing, to be detachedly respectful and authoritative, but he fails. We love the girls, we love them more... He is so embarrassed by his earlier thoughts. At first he tries not to look in her direction, but then he looks up. For a moment his obscurely colored eyes meet Ann-Margret's tired emeralds.
    "His methods are not mentioned in the official documents of the investigation," Teresh begins. - That's the tacit agreement with the prosecutor's office. This is to avoid giving the defense any unnecessary leads.
    "I take it this is some kind of parade?" - Under media pressure, the police, along with the city government, eventually dug up the entire west wing of Ringhalle Stadium. The sensitivist rolled his eyes and kept pointing, but there was a concrete foundation underneath and only a concrete foundation. And that was just one particular instance. - "I've seen enough of these necromancers," the woman remarked bitterly.
    Teresh makes a sign to Han to wait.
    "I don't do my job for the rule of law. I do it for sacrifice. - As he utters these words, he forgets himself. Confidence returns to him, he is once again an agent of the International Police, not the leaf in the wind that he has made himself. - "I don't care where or how the information comes from, as long as it proves productive. Let me say right off the bat, I have not worked with this consultant specifically. Unfortunately, his expertise is only in cases where the victim is already dead. But in these cases his talent is undeniable. For example, Ulv himself fell under suspicion. On eight different occasions when he gave advice. I don't know if you would find that compelling enough - I honestly do. The cases were not connected in any way, and not a single piece of evidence was found against him. You see?"
    The woman thoughtfully takes out another cigarette, Teresh offers her a light, and Khan seizes the moment. He rests his hands on the table and blurts out:
    "He doesn't know anything about girls!"
    "And what does that mean?" - the woman wondered.
    Khan looks at her, smiling broadly:
    "He couldn't give any information about them. Nothing at all. A completely blank slate: he doesn't know where they are, doesn't know anything about their past, no secrets. But that's the point! He doesn't know anything about them because they're not dead."
    The woman is frightened, but does not show it, her elegant pose unchanged. Teresch notices something suspicious in her reaction, but his deep respect for her prevents him from knowing what it is.
    "Did the consultant himself tell you that?" - Ann-Margret still looks at Khan questioningly. He places a clipboard in front of her.
    "Here are my notes. About the girls. And this is the short version I gave him. His notes are at the very end. See for yourself, he uses these exact words: 'not dead'."
    Ann-Margret turns the pages. The grief of the world passes before her eyes again, photocopies and dates, the whole chronology of events. Han continues:
    "In such cases it is customary to give another envelope, a control envelope. If there is no way to check the answer for the first one - we have this envelope of girls, only with it we would have nothing to hold on to - its correctness is confirmed by the correct answer for the second one. And you know who isn't dead yet?" - Han pulls the second envelope out from behind his groove and places it on the table. Only now, after seeing this envelope, Teresh is thinking seriously about Han's strange experiment. It says "Sigismund Berg" on it. Jesper doesn't know anything about it yet. He stares, stretching his neck curiously.
    "I gave him Zigi," Han gets into a frenzy, forgets himself, and explains directly to Jesper already. The arcs of cause and effect that he draws in the air become more and more fantastic. The way one para-specialist statement proves another, the mishmash of dotted lines, the writing that reads "Axiom!" And now these letters! So it's absolutely necessary to find out what became of the guy in the leather jacket--one more jump of the arrow--and then everything will unfold!
    Only Teresch, who has already heard it all, is still watching Ann-Margret's reaction. She's not there. The woman just looks at the page in the girls' folder. It's slowly getting darker outside, it's getting cold. She lifts her coat collar, and doesn't look at Teresh when he tries to catch her gaze. She hasn't been reading for a long time now, she just sits there, her eyes a familiar dark green color staring at one point. What is that elusive feeling gliding deep within them? Teresh thinks he knows. The way the corners of her eyes squint slightly is unrecognizable. She remembers. But what?
    It is evening, the blue twilight is thickening, and Han shines in the midst of it like a lamp. The air around him, in the quiet scattered village, is crystal cold. Khan leans back in his folding chair and wipes his glasses triumphantly. Teresh, sitting next to him, chooses the easiest of solutions: he reaches out and grips the edge of the folder. The woman still holds it in her hands. She hasn't even turned a page.
    "Will you allow it?"
    "Yes, of course," Ann-Margret nods. It's as if she's just woken up: "I have to admit, this is all very confusing..." And while Han explains that the girls' mother should now go to the police, Teresh looks at the page with the four photos of the Lund sisters. Han has lined them up by age, like pearls on a string.
   
    *****
   
    Ann-Margret closes the gate behind her guests. She waves them warmly out the back window of the car. The cab rolls down the gravel road, but Kenny is no longer behind the wheel. Kenny is long gone in his Kenny world, minding his Kenny business. They are forty kilometers from Vaasa, and the white country house, surrounded by chestnut trees, is never out of sight. As they leave, they are all secretly relieved. And a certain uneasiness. No one can say anything, only gravel rustles under the wheels. Finally, Han tries:
    "She kind of... she didn't seem very happy about it. So it seemed to me."
    Jesper blows his nose:
    "It was your stupid idea."
    "What do you think we should have done? Not explain anything, and let her sort it out herself, you know, with the same letters?"
    "Yes, yes! They're not dead, Mrs. Lund, your children are alive, you have living children! Couldn't you have just left her alone to find out for herself? You had to put on a show of revelations."
    They sit in silence for a while, staring sullenly out the windows. They are driving along a country road, the car is shaking, and Teresh asks the driver if he can smoke inside. He pulls out a cigarette. A match flashes in the semi-darkness, and the tissue paper crackles in its flame. "The Astra smokes, the cabin fills with a bitter smell. After so many hours in Kenny's car, it almost seems like treason to sit here.
    Khan's conscience begins to gnaw:
    "Maybe we really shouldn't have done that. What if she's already made her peace with it, and we've only upset her for nothing? What if it doesn't work out..."
    "You think so? - Jesper sneered. - Maybe it was our duty! To break into a stranger's house and enlighten her about her children," he thinks for a moment, then continues, "I don't really think so, Han. I don't believe she's reconciled. Maybe she's just trying to get on with her life. Although, of course, I've never had children.
    Teresh pulls an ashtray out of the carriage door. He smokes, silently. They avoid the freeways, which are now full of traffic jams. So they take country roads among the evening fields and woods. By the middle of the road, Teresh is smoking his sixth cigarette and it's getting stuffy in the cabin. A well-mannered former agent, he opens the window and lets in some fresh air with a few snowflakes. They drive along a ravine. Bare bushes whiz by, and a snowfall begins to fall over the fields in the distance.
    "She wasn't reconciled," says Teresh. - She forgot. I haven't seen one picture of them in this whole house. When you gave her your folder, she looked at them like she was trying to remember who they were."
    Khan shrugs his shoulders, as if from the cold. Everyone is silent. It's a sign of agreement. Another long pause, and Jesper clears his throat. This is their way of letting each other know how they feel. Rarely do they talk amongst themselves about what they really think. All because of the disappearance. Because they talked too much in the beginning, so much that talking stopped helping. All is said, they have nothing more to comfort each other with. And that's why it's so strange for everyone to hear Jesper say, "Sometimes I feel like the whole world has forgotten about them."
    "It is," says Teresh.
    And Han says:
    "Well, let's go find this asshole."
    "We're leaving today," says Teresh.
    Khan asks: "And where are we going?"
    "To Grad," replies Teresh.
    Both turn and look at Jesper.
    "Davai," Jesper says.
   
    As darkness falls, a blizzard begins. They drive through the streets of Salem, and the city around them is covered in snow. For the first time this year. The cold and sweet smell of snow fills the cabin as Han rolls in with a large suitcase in each hand. Deep ruts remain in the snow in front of the house. His old mother stands at the door in her bathrobe and yells something, but no one hears what. The car is already rushing away, and a blizzard is howling between the houses.
    It snows the entire time they wait for Jesper in front of his house. Two hours. Already it looks like they might not make their nighttime magnet train. The rows of whitened spruces sway in the wind, the black motocarriage is slowly being swept away by the snow. Finally Jesper comes out, a white suitcase in his hand.
    "How did it go?"
    "Well, let's just say it's not very good," he replies. - Let's go."
    And they're on their way. Fast. They ask the cab driver to go even faster, but it's already dangerous. A blizzard draws streaks in the headlights, its chaos raging everywhere, on the roads, in the orange halos of the streetlights. Teresh tosses the driver his money and walks away, looking at his watch. He runs across the snow-covered square and hears the cab doors slam behind him. He doesn't care that Jesper forgot to pick up his things.
    Jesper's only regret is that he didn't have time to find a rubber band before he broke up with the model. It didn't come out too pretty. He regrets that, too. He runs, holding his suitcase in his hand, snow flying into his eyes, and all sorts of scathing answers swirling in his head: "All this fashion nonsense, this fashion nonsense, understand, you can't get far on that now. This whole modeling thing, it's got no future. Take my house, you'll live in Vaasa now, you see, it's not safe to travel. It's time to find a normal job."
    It's night, but the elevators are jammed. Everyone is arguing, Teresh is waving fake IDs: "International Police, disperse!" He is no longer Somerset Ulrich; now he is Cosmo Konchalovsky. Cosmo is not a missing agent, he is a figment of Teresh's imagination. It's to confuse the trail - so no one can track him down.
    Only when the crowded elevator car elevators them above the city do the three friends crouch down on their suitcases to catch their breath. The city is shrouded in snow, the traffic lights at the motorway interchanges paint its whiteness dark green, the streetlights golden, orange... until the cabin dives into the darkness of the air terminal. The elevator doors open and they run out under the high steel arches of the station. There they are greeted by the same nocturnal crowd. It is crowded everywhere, in the hall, in front of the ticket office, even though the scoreboards show that there are no seats left, and a feline voice from the loudspeaker confirms it. And even the SNR flight to Samara the day after tomorrow is sold out. Yes, they are! The bureaucratic deformed workers state is where you wish you were right now. Not to mention that the irrigation canal network is disappearing in Graada at this very moment, followed by the crest of a wave rising menacingly over Yekokataa. Where are you running, stay home, go to the army!
    They push their way onto the platform. There, high up under the night sky, it is also snowing, and when the conductor too eagerly stops them at the door of the five-story, flattened wagon, Teresh does something he has never done. Cosmo Konchalovsky's imperious shouts have no effect on the conductor, stupefied by the noise of the crowd. A girl with a cat-like voice announces the imminent departure of the flight and asks to step behind the yellow line. Already the hiss of the train's hydraulic doors can be heard. Teresch slips his hand behind his sinus and pulls out a pistol. He still has the leather holster pocket hanging under his arm. The barrel of the pistol glistens, the conductor steps back in front of the service weapon, and Teresh, holding tightly to the mahogany railing, enters the luxurious twilight of the train. Han and Jesper slip in behind him. Doors slam, magnets howl, one of Han's suitcases remains on the platform.
    Teresh holsters his pistol and apologizes to the frightened guide. They're not used to that here in Katla. Finally returning to diplomacy, the ex-agent thanks the woman for her assistance. Outside, on the platform, giant buffers disconnect from the train. The umbilical cord is cut, and, freed from the struts, the five-story train rests with all its weight on the magnets. They hum beneath the cars with all their might. And then the flight begins.
    A magnetic cushion beneath the train slides the waters of the North Sea. The carriage is quiet, the generators rumble, and the train rushes fifty meters above the water. Friends, smiling, stand at the observation window. Teresh puts out his cigarette in a bronze ashtray, they turn their backs to the window and walk away. Before them lies Greyness, and beyond it is the big world. And somewhere out there, in its cities, in the streets, in the vastness of the steppes, is Zygismunt Berg, the only man in this world who knows what happened to the Lund sisters. Only light pollution, a distant golden glow in the darkness and snowstorms, remains from the city behind, outside the window.

▲
15. PLACE
⬍
    15. PLACE
   
    Director Trentmöller lies in a catatonic state. The nursing home around him has become mute. Direk can no longer remember the names for any of the things, and all the connections between them have lost meaning. Everything is forgotten. He looks at the world with blissful amazement, like a baby. Two months later, a nurse walks into his room and sighs with relief while still at the door. She disconnects the IV from the old man's arm. Lacy shadows from twigs slide across the walls of the room as a motocarriage whizzes down the suburban street outside.
    The wheels squeak in the snow, and inside, in the warmth of the cabin, a famous minimalist and deaf music critic, Ore Okerlund, a former colleague of Jesper's at the design office, is sprawled out. His prospects can't be called brilliant. Rewriting Western music reviews is almost impossible if new albums aren't coming out. But, as we know, he uses a lot of cocaine, and that, we know, makes him very smart. The social climate has changed, but consumption as such hasn't gone anywhere. So there's a place for advertising, too. Ore Åkerlund sets up what would later become the world-famous Ideas Lab in Vaasa, an advertising agency that develops ideas for advertising, not ads. For someone else to bring them to life in the future. A few months later, a masterpiece of apocalyptic advertising would be born at the Ideas Lab. And the transport giant ZAMM will launch an interisolar campaign in the Nordic countries with the slogan "Run! It's not too late".
    Then, or a little later, around the winter solstice, Conrad Hessle's new documentary goes unnoticed by the general public. A long and dark winter is coming, and the panicked masses are hungry for lighter entertainment. Whether the director is an eight-time Oscar Zorn Award nominee or not. But then the Meskian ecumenical aggressor withdraws his fleet from Greys, taking this maneuver to the far north beyond the Polar Plateau. The black smoke of his ships rises to the sky beneath the northern lights in the Graadian region of Cold Earth. Two months earlier, Graad, which had declared war on the state of Mesk, was joined by Arda, Vaasa, and Surumaa. Thus Katla, the most peaceful land in the world, is sucked into a huge centrifuge.
    Ticket sales for "Vidkun Hird: Vidkun Hird" are on the rise. To his great chagrin, Konrad Hessle sees in cinemas exactly the sort of audience he most feared when he launched his controversial project. Hard times lend a national coloring to discontent, and young militarists with moronic Nazi tattoos sit mesmerized in front of the screens. None of them understand the humanist Hessle's masterful handling of symbols, his irony, his sense of the absurd. These soldiering boys sincerely, without a trace of irony, admire Hird posing in his black shirt. They are particularly impressed by how this colossus eventually collapses under the weight of his superhuman maxims. They find the nonsense he spews in recent interviews poetic. The voiced white noise footage of Heard drooling in his cell touches them to tears. In the end, even his own mighty mind proved unable to accommodate these ancient truths. They proved too honest, too pure. A true warrior, Heard made every effort to the end not to fall under the influence of a diluted culture. In this was his triumph, his pride, and his hell: truth is too great a force.
    This is just one of the absurd events of the apocalypse, but it is thanks to him that Sven von Fersen decides it is time to come out of the shadows. He gradually moves from witty articles on leadership to "statements in support of the government and the armed forces. Later, when Grad and his northern allies begin to lose the world war, Ilmaraa proves to be the only country capable of organizing real resistance. Sven von Fersen is unwilling to accept a helping hand from Camel Shit: "Before you know it, they'll stab you in the back with a scimitar.
    But in the end, fascism remains in the same niche of social consciousness that it has always occupied - between cryptozoology and psionics. A large part of society is represented by people who do not look like Sven von Fersen. Their inherent sense of style as northerners is too developed, and extreme views do not resonate. The delicate hand of the editor weeds out racially intolerant language from such essays. After all, not publishing them at all would be a violation of free speech. So this part of the land plunges into Grayness, and, with the rest of the world, into geopolitical chaos - but instead of collapsing, it is more likely to dissolve. Still remaining social-democratic. Still lavishly handing out cash benefits to those who are beating the bollocks. Cruisers are dying under shelling in the North Sea, but the state still offers the unemployed man of art the opportunity of retraining in his field. Grad loses the Polar Plateau in the North, Jelinka burns in a fire on a three-month winter night, and no one survives, but unemployed Peter Petersson still talks about the book he is about to finish. Grad leaves the secondary theater of war in Katla, gathering forces to defend his native Isola, the way to Arda proves to be open to the aggressor, the front approaches day by day, but we still hear nothing of Peter Petersson's book. Thus, despite the indignation of the extremists, Vaasarijk goes behind the scenes of the story with three years of paid parental leave and flawless public transportation.
    Nothing seems to stand in the way of environmentally conscious "projects of the future. In the months when Greyscale is already creeping toward Vaasa across the ocean, the cherished dream of light-pollution lobbying groups is coming true. Industrial and commercial buildings extinguish artificial lights at the end of the day, and streetlights are covered with special filters. Vaasa is becoming the first and last major city in history to be completely free of light pollution. This is not only a measure against bombing, but also a concern for the birds, who without it could easily get lost in the light mazes of the city, and the seals, whose mating rhythm is disturbed by too long a day. You can laugh about it, but while the big world in the background turns into a bloody whirlwind, evenings in Vaasa you go outside with your family and act as if nothing is happening. Only distant explosions disturb the deep calm of the winter night, the purity of its starry sky. Everyone looks up at him with their heads tilted back.
    Han's old mother is watching, too, in her Salem home. Her eyes are lined with black, according to the Ilmaraan custom, and her hair is tucked under a golden shawl. It is cold, and the woman's breath turns to steam on the built-up wooden street. That night, four years ago, Alia Khan saw her son for the last time. A little later -- not more than a month later -- he called to say goodbye to his mother. Families were walking around, men of mobilization age among others. Inayat said he wasn't coming back, but they keep coming back. Soldiers from the Northern Front. Everyone has somehow forgotten about the war, too. All this is a kind of decline, a surrender, but at the same time embodies a motto belonging to none other than moralism, a movement of which social democracy is the daughter cell. It goes like this: "For a moment it seemed that there was hope for humanity.
    By the time the stars begin to distort behind the overhanging wall of nothingness, many can no longer take the phrase "end of the world" seriously. Panic has subsided. In a strange weary indifference to evacuation, entire families remain in Vaasa. They play board games in private homes and spacious apartments. They prefer vitamin-rich foods, and when only a few days are left before the arrival of Grey, it is always alerted by the same remarkable phenomenon. The fruit is covered with mold. It grows in them at a painful rate. Children listen to the oranges crunching on the table. Spores germinate in the pulp, apples are covered with fluff. If you try to touch them, they burst with a pop. No one knows why this happens. But by this time, few people are in a state of fear, so you can say it's beautiful.
    Hana's mother is one of those who decides to stay in Vaasa when the Greyness comes. But many flee. They head for Arda, closer to the front, away from Greyness. There, in Winter Orbit, Anita Lundquist takes her beautiful hands and goes to polish the ammunition factory with them. In recent years, especially after the evacuation, the model shows extraordinary strength. The nonchalance and zest for life that made her a model citizen of a functioning world are revealed from a completely different angle in the end of the world. These are leadership qualities, and Anita Lundqvist becomes queen of the refugee camp. When Ore Okerlund meets her there, he doesn't immediately recognize her. Who is this Valkyrie? But then Anita comes to him herself, greeting him by name and bringing him medicine to ease his withdrawal. The famous minimalist and deaf music critic is grateful to her. He tells the girl about what is going on in the world. About the international drug trade, which has ceased to exist. And about how the black I.R.I. bill, the interisolar real, has depreciated and the world economy has collapsed. Finally, Okerlund also tells of what is no longer the world - all that he experienced on his way to the refugee camp. He reached Arda on foot. Late for the general evacuation, he trekked for two months through ice-bound fjords. He walked through abandoned ghost towns, he was there all alone, and Greyness followed on his heels. He crawled through the permafrost, where the snow-covered wreckage of downed airships piled up all around him. Okerlund also tells of the horse that drove his sleigh, which he eventually ate. And Anita tells him about Jesper. She says only good things about him.
    The factory where Anita works is a strategic enterprise. Although it is hidden deep in the fjords, the Mosaic reconnaissance satellite recently launched into orbit by Mesch detects it. The ecumenical aggressor wipes out the munitions factory with a hail of bombs, and the model disappears in a whirlwind of war. This takes place six years after the blizzard night when Han, Jesper, and Teresh left.
    Beyond the southern shore of Katla, the enemy of matter, the Great Transition, is burying what is left of the Isola beneath it. The one where Vaasa and Charlotteville Beach were. No one else will come from there now, though stragglers - friends and relatives - are still waiting in the camps. Somewhere out there, in the middle of Grey, Ann-Margret Lund sits in her kitchen, her house quiet and tidy. The former teacher, dressed in a beige jacket and knee-length skirt, watches the apricots go moldy. Perhaps needless to say, she never went to the police. Ann-Margret lets go of her husband's hand. Like the others, there is nothing she can do about this endlessly lingering state in which the sense of the present is slowly disappearing. But while others dissolve into their memories, she is simply lost. It's as if her life never happened. The past doesn't wait for her to go back. She simply wanders through the rooms, adjusting her grandmother's lace tablecloths and bedspreads, straightening the curtains on the eaves. And just like that, maintaining her dignity, she refuses to indulge in the ecstasy that accompanies the destruction of the human spiritual world. Nothing fills her palms, nothing returns.
    And when Katla's isola finally sinks into grayness, Ann-Margret Lund will turn into a squirrel body without the slightest joy.

▲
16. ENTROPONAVT
⬍
16. ENTROPONAVT
    Six years earlier, somewhere far away, at the very edge of another isola, a man wakes up. It is the seventy-second year. He is here all alone. In the morning it is dark and cold in his tarpaulin tent, the man curled up in a ball in his sleeping bag. He rubs his sides to warm himself, a shabby sheep's wool sweater biting his skin. It gets the blood flowing, and the man finally dares to stick his hand out of the sack. He sleeps in fingerless wool gloves. It is a common trick of his profession. He scrambles across the floor, finds a flashlight in the darkness, and fiddles with a frozen switch for half a minute. Eventually the light bulb comes on; the electric light is so pathetic that it barely illuminates the one-bed tent. With his legs tucked under him, the man sits in his sleeping bag and tries to warm his hands. He blows on his fingers, his toothless mouth quivering. The beam of the flashlight illuminates the stamp on the inside of the tent: "Microcosmos Cooperative.
    The man puts his palm to the tarpaulin: it is cold, the tent is sagging under the weight of the snow that has enveloped it tightly. Not a ray of light enters from outside, nor is there any wind noise: the storm died down during the night. The electronic clock shows that today is his birthday: He is thirty-nine years old. It's 7:15 in the morning. Crouching in his microcosm, the man climbs out of his sleeping bag, throws an anorak jacket over his sweater, and slips his feet into his lace-up boots. The lock on the entrance cracks open, and right as it is, with bare feet, the man walks out of the tent into Grayness.
    Twenty kilometers from the edge of the world, snow falls silently. In the morning twilight, a human ruin waddles to a tree a few meters in front of the tent. All around, jagged rocks and a ghostly jagged line of stunted spruces are streaking across the black and white sleepy face of the taiga landscape. Through snow and fog in the bleached world a barely discernible blue pierces, from somewhere beyond the reach of the eye. It's morning, and it won't get any brighter. And in this dim light, beneath a bare tree stands a completely destroyed human being. An entroponaut. An aging rocker. His name is Sigismund Berg, and he's wearing dark blue underwear with a white border. He pees.
    The camp is set up on a hillside, on a terrace surrounded by spruce trees. The sound of a shovel scraping through the snow as the entroponaut digs up the tent can be heard first through the misty valley below. Then the clatter of the axe. With a bundle of brushwood in his hands, Zygmunt Berg walks through the clearing back to the tent. Large flakes of snow are floating in the air, and the man now wears frayed jeans on his feet. He unbuttoned his jacket as he worked, the hood pulled back over his shoulders-and suddenly he's frozen. Up ahead, behind the gray veil, something moved.
    Silence. This is the silence from which all the other silences arose. The Entroponaut inhales sharply, briefly; the sound of breathing, the noise of blood in my ears here seems so loud as to be deafening. The wood pressed to his knees crackles. He stands still, habitually hunched over. The snowfall stops, Greyness is now as motionless as he is. The minutes drag on, the numbers on the electronic clock freeze to "07:48.
    The clatter of hooves on granite can be heard. Straight ahead, on the rock, a goat emerges from Grey. Zygismunt looks at him intently, and the goat looks at Zygismunt. Both of their eyes are dark, moist with cold. Zygismunt Berg's head is bald and has the ponytail of an aging rocker, while the alpha male has a crown of huge horns. Behind the animal passes his herd, colored silhouettes moving through the Grayness; legs straightened, hooves tucked - they are climbing a mountain. The goat's horns cut through the fog like the spears of a marching army, streams of steam gush from the goats' nostrils. The young goats walk side by side with their queens, and the king himself leads the procession. Shaking his horns, the goat retreats into the Grey. He leaves the entroponaut alone.
    "Don't go," Zygizmunt asks in a whiny, drunken voice, "please don't go!" he throws brushwood and tries to climb the snow-covered stone wall. Hands in fingerless gloves scramble up the granite, his feet find no support. Breathing heavily, he wanders through the mist among the dwarf firs. No one's there, everyone's gone, what are you looking for there, you fool?
    "Don't go, please don't go... You're like that old man! You know, the one that goes to the park to be friends with the squirrels: "Mickey, Mickey, come here, little one!" The need for intimacy is just deadly. He can't take it."
    "But I'm so lonely."
    "You'll never be alone, Ziggy. You have you!"
   
    Twenty-one years ago, on winter break, at night, Sigi stands at the horse-drawn streetcar stop. In two days, the fifty-first year will become the fifty-second. The low-rise suburb of Vaasa sleeps all around, it's late and dark, but Zigi is in no hurry to go anywhere. His mother isn't waiting for him to come home. Staggering and tinkling with the locks on his leather jacket, the young man paces back and forth along the wooden bench. Just beyond it is the tall hedge of the roadside, a constant reminder of private property. It gets on his nerves.
    He had just gone to sell stuff to the children of rich parents. And shortly before that, he had performed the sprechgesang that made him famous at the Winter Solstice. The junior high school kids loved it, at least they laughed till they dropped. Some of the older kids said, "What a jerk. He certainly won't live to be twenty." But Zygi didn't care about those gymnasium kids anyway. They're already in the system. Only the "little handmaidens," as Zygi affectionately calls them, still have hope.
    Zigui is also drunk, and of course he wants to fool around. But no one is at the Fahlu stop at this time, so he has to make do with inanimate objects. Here he defies the streetcar schedule, but the schedule drifts. Frustrated by the schedule's cowardice, the boy tries to rip it off the pole, but the tin plate only bends from his efforts. And because Ziggy is the meanest bastard in the world - the one who steals schedules so that people don't know if the last streetcar has left or not - he rips off the sheet with the necessary information, crumples it into a lump, and throws it away. The bus stop is still empty, and Zygi is still in a fighting mood, so he decides to challenge the weltanschauung of the garbage can.
    "Hey, what did you say?! - Ziggy shoves the foul-mouthed cistern with both hands, but he's too fed up and pleased with himself to defend his honor. - I heard what you said in there. "Arrogant cattle," and in such a contemptuous tone, "raising his hand on private property." What, you think you're so tough, do you? "Cattle," "raises his hand." Arguing? And why not, we're educated people... But you know what?"
    Buck has no idea what Ziggy has to say. He has a hat made of snow with cigarette butts sticking out, and that's it. Can't the matter be settled peacefully?
    "How about this? А? Do you like it? Kick the shit out of it, bourgeois!" - Ziggy kicks the can so hard that he leaves a dent in it and almost loses his balance. After scolding the can, the insatiable element turns its wrath on the stop sign. It sways in the wind and says "Fahlu" on it. Getting hit from the jump, the sign begins to spin like a watermill wheel. But as he lands, Ziggy slips and flops on his back. The fine snow flies up in the air. Ziggy lies still for a while; he laughs, and the snow dust settles on his face. Above him, in the dark blue of the winter night sky, lanterns shine, snowflakes flutter. And somewhere beyond them, in the invisible blackness, the forgotten communications satellites glide in orbits of the past. Everything is spinning so beautifully - a beautiful, dark world, ready to disappear under the blows.
    But for Ziga, the party hasn't even started yet. He gets up. He has dismantled the schedule and now he doesn't know if the last streetcar has left or not. Fortunately, the young man is still eager to change the world, and we see him striding forward: the knees of his jeans white from the snow, his leather jacket unbuttoned, and the pop idol's long hair fluttering in the wind... He is walking down a suburban street, returning home on foot. And on both sides of the road, behind chain-link fences, wooden houses are dozing. He casts contemptuous glances at them: comfort is bourgeois. He looks for the one, his favorite.
   
    He has a brick in his hand.
    He has pimples on his forehead.
   
    Carl Lund, a young paper business owner, reads a newspaper in the living room on the first floor. In the title is the silhouette of a centaur in a cylinder hat and the word "Capitalist," in a solid, serif typeface. This is not the notes of some home-grown speculator; it is a newspaper, founded five hundred years ago at the dawn of the market economy, one of the oldest in the world. There is not a word here about getting rich quick; the Capitalist looks at all political reality through the prism of economics. The way it really is, if you put aside the fantasies of the turn of the century. Carl Lund reads to understand, and understands to help; he cares about this world. Sincerely. You would love to read it yourself--and become a much more respected person than you are now--but unfortunately, you can't understand The Capitalist.
    Ziggy doesn't understand either. He tried, but it didn't work. Really, he didn't try very hard. The bad harvest in Yesut, the tsara'at epidemic in Saramiris, none of these are about Zigui. He doesn't feel they touch him in any way. He sees them as recriminations, empty negativity. Zigi doesn't care about the world, he doesn't want to understand or help. He wants something else entirely, and what, he will show you now. The boy tightens the laces on his sneakers: thanks to vodka anesthesia, he doesn't feel the cold. With a brick in his hand, he stands at the gate of the white wooden house and waves.
    The projectile leaves his hand, Ziggy grins beastly after him. The brick flies into the darkness of the winter night, where a hateful caricature awaits at the end of its journey - what a man leading a slightly more normal life is to the young Berg: the smell of mahogany, books in leather bindings. The window shatters into a thousand small shards, and the papermaker leaps up from his chair. On the top floor, foreshadowing trouble, dark green eyes open.
    "I'm sick of waiting! - screams Zigui, pressing his elbows to his sides and crouching with exertion. - Go away, world, disappear!" Steam and splashes of saliva burst from his mouth. It's his vodka-smelling fiery breath; he's a dragon.
    Carl Lund is still young in fifty-one, not yet forty; he flies to the door like a shotgun blast and pulls on his sneakers. For the last few months he has found bags full of garbage in his garden that say "BURJUY". In the mornings everything is strewn with garbage, dirty cans hanging from the branches of quince bushes. He swings the gate open, leaps out into the street, and stops for a moment. Some fifty meters away, right in the middle of the street, a figure in a black leather jacket runs away at full gallop. The paper maker jumps out of his seat and runs after the boy.
    Ziggy's long, pop star-like black hair flutters in the wind - wavy and a little greasy. The frosty halos around the streetlights shrink and widen again behind him as he whizzes past. Snow flies from under his sneakers, the flaps of his open jacket flapping in the wind. Ziggy is spirited with alcohol, he's in the prime of life. But his sneakers slip in the snow, and he's been a smoker since he was nine. And P.E. is not his favorite class.
    Carl Lund regularly goes out for a run with his colleagues. And, of course, he doesn't smoke. Not even cigars. Although a couple of days ago, I think Ziggy saw him - holding a garbage bag marked "BURGUE" with his fingertips - sticking one, large and penis-like, in his mouth. There, in the window of the stylish wooden house. By the way, he also doesn't drink brandy out of a decanter and isn't a member of Les Morts. Nor does he travel as a sex tourist to developing countries.
    A man runs, dressed in a black sweater with a high neck, the white leather of his sneakers gleaming in the snow. The distance shortens, at the corner Zygi slips and rushes on running from a low start. He hears Carl Lund yell thirty yards behind him: "Stop, you scumbag!" His palms ache and his lungs burn with fire, but the alcohol has so far given Ziggy a superhuman resistance to pain. In fact, he's already torn his leg muscles: after years without training, the sudden sprint was a big surprise. But Zigi doesn't feel anything. He could run for ages.
    Of course, this is an illusion: in reality, his body has a limit, and after eight minutes of pursuit he makes himself known. At the railroad crossing, there are only ten meters between them. Turning abruptly, Ziggy runs up the stairs onto the platform. In the silence of the suburban night, the stomping of feet on concrete and the increasingly ragged breathing of the runners can be heard far away. Two dark figures move across the platform in the glow of lanterns, and the distance between them shrinks. Glancing over his shoulder, Zigi sees the bourgeois approaching, moving energetically and precisely, like a robot sent from the future. The boy leaps from the edge of the platform, aiming for the nooks and crannies of the station industrial area where he has often wandered in his spare time. Barely able to stand on his feet as he lands, he rushes forward through the snow. He hopes that there, in the shadow of the railroad embankment, he will finally break away from the robot. Like hell he will give up! People like this one are usually afraid to even leave the house. They call their favorite cops and have fun with them.
    Between the wooden fence and the embankment is a snow-covered lane; Ziggy is running along it. The magic of the vodka is already dissipating; he's limping like a shot game. He feels his right leg cramp up. To hell with it! But first, one last effort. Don't fucking give up! I want to smoke.
    Behind Zigi runs Carl Lund: he is already catching a trail of sweat in the air with his nostrils. He comes from a future where the end of the world never came. The only people there are the bourgeoisie, and the working class is almost annihilated. With a quick glance at his surroundings, Carl Lund sees a dead end of garages ahead. He makes one last dash before colliding, preparing to nail Ziggy to the wall. With all his might. Just by looking at this cockroach, he knows he can easily overpower him. Reaching out, the man touches the boy's shoulder. Only a meter of ground remains to the garage wall. With his right foot, Ziggy pushes himself straight up against the brick wall, but his cramped leg is unable to do exactly what he has planned. The plan is not fully realized: he does not run up the wall, dashing like a Seraidean swordsman. He slips, but still manages to grab the edge of the roof with both hands. Ziggy climbs up the wall, but Carl Lund catches him by the leg.
    "Got you, damn you!"
    But then, right above them, on the roof of the garage, Zygi's friend appears and rushes to their aid. Ziggy's friend is great and formidable, though crippled by time. He flutters in the darkness like a gray banner, calling after him.
   
    A completely annihilated human being rolls up his self-curdling cigarette in the recently absorbed Grey taiga of Northeastern Samara, in the Nad-Umaisky ecoregion. Twenty kilometers to the south, the world begins, with the Samara People's Republic. And four thousand kilometers farther northeast lies Katla Isola, and no one knows what lies in between.
    "Don't be naive, of course, this isn't some afterlife," Zygismunt concludes the pointless argument. He pulls cut tobacco out of an aluminum pickle jar and spreads it out on a piece of paper. Before leaving Sapurmat-Ulan, he stocked up on tobacco for two months.
    The rations should be enough. For the buckwheat stamps at the central market, they offered only the dust from the bottom of the can, and the paper was also all over the place, the edges did not stick together properly. The paper stuck to my lip, the burning tobacco from the tip of the cigarette fell on my chest. The Entroponaut shakes off his jacket with his hand; the smoldering glow of sparks is the only colorful spot in the grayness that surrounds him. He sits, legs apart, in the triangular entrance of the tent, and right in front of him, in a hole dug in the snow, a fire is smoking. On the other side of the fire hunches the ghostly gray cytoplasm of Ignus Nielsen: Kras Mazov's friend, schoolteacher, and apocalyptic bloodsucker. This eerie defect of film ripples against the fog-shrouded spruces at the edge of the clearing, black and white and completely unnatural.
    "Happy Birthday," says the ghostly gray cytoplasm.
    "I'm thirty-nine," answers Zygismunt Berg. - So, how is it now?"
    "You can round it up to forty right away. It doesn't matter anymore. Set yourself up in advance, tell yourself right away that you're forty years old."
    "I'm forty."
    "Forty! What's changed? I told you you'll never get past twenty. You have no plans for that time. Why did you have to get so far ahead of yourself?"
    "You know, Ignus, I want to disappear..." - the man says dreamily, rustling his head. At the heart of the fire, a dark orange tongue of flame comes to life.
    "Still? Haven't you disappeared enough?"
    "There's always something to strive for, Ignus. You could have left less: a paper trail, an appointment at the dentist..." - Ziggy hangs the pot over the fire, fresh snow melting in it.
    "These are the teeth that will track you down! In the time you've been in Grad, you could have pulled them out yourself, at least with a screwdriver!"
    "I tried it, but it was too painful."
    "I don't understand what you're saying, don't go off topic! And besides doctors, there is the bourgeois legal system. You think too highly of it. All their confidentiality agreements are one pokazuha. Remember Mazow."
    Ziggy pulls the dentures out from behind his sinus and shoves them in his mouth.
    "You keep going off topic yourself. What Mazov? And anyway - look around! Who will come here looking for me? Not even the Institute of Entroponautics will find me here.
    "You think so?"
    Ziggy puts on his gloves and waits for the water to boil.
    "Yes, I think so. And there's more! Now I don't just want to disappear from the country.
    "But where to next, Ziggy? There are lots of countries, they're everywhere.
    "I want to disappear from the world."
    The gray over the snow-covered clearing is blue. The water in the cauldron sizzles.
    "My God..." sighs Ignus Nielsen, reduced by the time-censor to a faceless stump. The mountain range leaves his distorted, upside-down recording voice disembodied, devoid of echo. - God, I'm so sick of this disappearance crap."
   
    With a tremendous effort, Ziggy frees his leg from Carl Lund's grip. Stepping on the father's shoulder, he throws himself onto the roof of the garage. He towers there, triumphant against the winter sky - so young and so free. The bourgeoisie bows before him.
    "Well? What are you going to do to me now? - Ziggy shouted, gesturing mockingly at how he "fucked" the bourgeois. - What are you gonna do now, huh? You gonna climb up? I'll break your fingers!" - He stomps his foot on the edge of the roof, demonstrating what will happen if you climb up after him. - The future is mine! You're gonna lose! You already fucking lost!"
    "Fine," whispers Ignus Nielsen from the darkness. - I didn't take kindly to that middle class either. You know, Mazov and I exterminated them by the hundreds of thousands. We exterminated almost a million bourgeois, and we would have exterminated more, but there wasn't enough time.
    "I'm going to kill you! - Yells Ziggy. He's already turned on the mansard apocalypse maker: everything is allowed now. - You've got the whole world on your hands, and I'm gonna kill you. And your whole family."
    "You ought to see a doctor, boy. - With a wave of the hand, Carl Lund turns around and is about to leave, but Ziggy shovels a palm full of snow and clumps it into a lump. After being hit in the back of the head with a snowball, the man turns around in a rage and rushes back. - I remembered you, you scumbag!"
    "I remembered you," Ziggy snarls back. - I remember you too, I know where you live!" - Snow swirls around Zygi, flakes melting in his black hair.
    "Come on, get down, you bastard, come here, if you're so tough!"
    "Uh-oh, I'm coming! - Ziggy throws another snowball, but the man dodges it. - And I've got the angels of death with me, the kind in leather coats! Your family's dead! Faggot!"
    "Great style," approves Ignus Nielsen from the shadows behind him, "that allusion to the Special Branch guys was very good. You're a poet. But a poet not of words, but of actions!"
    "I'll rape your wife!"
    "Way to go, my boy, way to go! Keep it up!"
    "I'll nationalize your factories, I'll have you living in Yekokataa!"
    "You're getting too deep into the theory, don't, it's thin ice. You know you don't know anything about it. Tell him he's a pederast!"
    "Faggot!"
    An exasperated Carl Lund tries to climb up, but Ziggy throws snow in his face and pretends to jump on his toes, and the man falls back down.
    "Okay, we can end there, but say something especially strong to him last!"
    "Faggot!"
    "Will do," says Ignus Nielsen, and the leather-jacket-clad figure of Sigi disappears into the darkness between the garages.
   
    A lone silhouette emerges from the bluish haze, next to the huge wheels of a dump truck covered with snow. The Nad-Umai is still gloomy and gray. Zygismunt Berg walks alone along the road that runs along the edge of the mountain; he has a huge backpack on his back, and his aging rocker's ponytail is hidden deep under the hood of his jacket. Smoke billows from the fur-trimmed hood like a chimney. With ski poles in his hands and a joint in his teeth, the man makes his way through the entrocatastrophe zone.
    "When Mazov got tired of waiting for the world revolution..."
    "You mean when he shot himself in the head because he became a monster? Or because he realized he was losing?"
    "No, it isn't," Ignus Nielsen rippled to his left hand like a gray banner. - Mazov had a vulnerable soul. Reaction raged everywhere, no matter how many we killed, there were always more of them. And then the setbacks began, it all turned out to be a total failure in Revashol. He didn't think he was a monster, he just couldn't stand the grief."
    The lone trail of Zygizmunt's hiking boots stretches along the road, between the spruces. On either side are traces of ski poles.
    "Tell me, what did it cost to get all the power in your hands? How many of your comrades' lives? This time, tell me how it really was. "I realized that Mazow's ideas were alive when other communists came to kill me!" Was there such a thing? Or didn't it?"
    "Of course not, Zygismunt, you just want to present us in a worse light. So that you don't have to believe in anything else. So you can do what you came here to do. Tell me, when do I expect a personnel purge? Among the two of us. When will you continue on your way alone?"
    "To tell you the truth, Ignus, I'm already thinking about it."
    "Then think about it, but know that it wasn't just murder and terror. When I got power, when it was all in my hands, it was a giddy feeling. Can you imagine what it feels like to have the whole country to yourself? And behind it, behind that feeling, there was only a desire for good. I held Graad in my hands, gently, as an architect holds a new paneled neighborhood, these matchboxes. - In his chest, like a window into history, a row of gray boxes peeked through the ripples. - Then I swore that now that I had the chance, I would do anything for a man. And you know, I didn't disappoint myself."
    "You blew everything but one extra-isolar colony - what's with the goat shit?"
    "Don't be so petty. I understand your skepticism, but don't underestimate Samara. I left my heart in Samara. When we retreated here..."
    "That's right, retreated! Why did you retreat again? Why do ours always retreat?"
    "It was inevitable. And I wasn't going to become a fatalist. To admit defeat. I gave everything for the good of this colony. My Samara Revolutionary Republic!"
    "I agree, 'People's Republic' sounds cheesy."
    "I'll never forgive them for that. Once I was gone, they ruined everything. What a wretched thing to do! I'll never forgive them!" the ghostly gray cytoplasm raged.
    The Entroponaut walks across the mountain bridge with the barriers open. Empty gatehouses doze in the snow on either side of the road. At the end of the bridge is a sign: "Nemengi-Uul - 36 kilometers. And further on, beyond the snow and gray fog, the taiga of the Umai Range. Two weeks ago the richest in the world reserves of fluorine, tungsten and zinc, extremely rare Samarskite were extracted from the earth's crust here... shops rumbled, industrial waste stained the pure silver streams with rusty foam. But all that is in the past, now there is peace and quiet. The Entroponaut descends the dump truck road into a dusky cleft in the valley, where the spruce forest darkens on all sides. And in front of him, jumbled hoof tracks run along the snow-covered road.
    "It was tremendous! It was total self-denial, self-sacrifice for the people. I was an amphetamine-fueled control machine, I never slept. None of us slept. We built it all out of nothing. Only with the help of the jicuts. It was a brotherhood of nations. They respected our weapons, and we respected their lively wit and dance. In six years, out of nothing, we built a country. Workers worked themselves to death - in the swamp, for five days without rest; they were literally dying on the construction site, from heart attacks, from overwork..."
    "At gunpoint?"
    "You think it is, but you're wrong. Of course, it would be like that now, but not in those days. You can't imagine what was going on here, nor how it was. The intoxicating happiness that permeated the world!"
    "Intoxicating happiness? You've got everybody sitting on amphetamine, which hasn't even been medically tested."
    But Ignus doesn't listen.
    "Oh yes, I said amazing things! I was on a white horse, I stood in the middle of a snowstorm and made speeches. On the construction site, in the mountains... I shook my sword, and the sword had silver sunbeams on the tip. And everywhere around me were white flags with silver embroidered coats of arms: deer antlers pointing to the sky, with a five-pointed star between them. Everyone who came here with me was happy, Ziggy! Communism is mighty! Faith in Communism is a great inspiration! I swear! It's wonderful to believe in man, but without him!"
    "Without him there is nothing."
    "Not at all. There was a snowstorm, but it was light, it was morning. Communism is white as snow, it sparkles! Communism is the dawn, it's jubilation!"
    The gray around the entroponaut begins to thin dangerously. The world turns white, and a crown of silvery rays begins to break out of Ignus's chest in the shadows of the spruce trees. The falling snow glistens in them like silver confetti, color seeps threateningly into the world. Zygismunt stops abruptly. He covers his ears with his hands and shouts: "Stop it! Stop it!"
    "Stop it, stop it..." rolls over the forest, cleaving the air like a sword.
    "Please forgive me, my friend Zygismunt," the voice of the anomaly is heard.
    Breathing heavily, the man stands in the middle of the forest road, foggy and semi-dark again. The grayness returns, and the entroponaut exhales with relief.
    "Are you trying to drive me crazy?"
    "No, I just wanted you to understand how good it was then. What a time it was. What a wonderful time! Excuse me..."
    "That time is gone. It's left on your punch cards and buried in shit. No one can tell you what it was anymore. No one knows what it was really like. It's not there anymore. What really was there is gone, only the Grayness is left. It's a fake. You know that. I know that."
    "That's what your girls say," Cytoplasm whispers softly in Sigismund's ear. The spruces ripple a little, the Grayness is dark but seductively soft. - It's your girls, girls don't believe in anything, they're all bourgeois, Zygi.
    "They were not bourgeois."
    "They were bourgeois, each of them. They read their girls' magazines. Revashol bourgeois fashion and perfume, stories about losing their virginity. It's all bourgeois. Every girl is really a weapon of the bourgeoisie."
    "You didn't know them, you don't know what they were thinking. Nobody knows what they were thinking. And I don't know, but there was nothing bourgeois about them, Ignus. It was something else."
    "If that's what you want to believe, be my guest. But it's better to believe in man without him, believe in communism.
    "I tried, but I can't! I can't do it... I'm not a communist.
    "But then why are you talking to me? I am communism, the same ghost that walks the earth. Why have you been with me all these years if you don't believe in communism?"
    "From anger at those who are better off in life, Ignus. Besides, you're a monster, a grotesque. Who would refuse the company of a monster?"
    "I'm not a monster."
    "You're a monster, they call you an apocalyptic bloodsucker. Have you ever heard anyone else called that? You're the only one! All this massacre in Grahad passed through your hands, your signature is everywhere. And even when you were retreating, when Mazov was no longer giving orders, you ordered the enemy soldiers to be staked. Twelve thousand men. You were chipping the stakes with fir trees at the roots! A whole forest of stakes, Ingus, that's a hell of a thing!"
    "It's for the sake of letting me build my country! My state of the future. Understand, they would never leave us alone... They would hunt us down like animals!"
    "Maybe so, but it's too much. Look at what you've become! A bloodsucker!"
    Human speech sounds out of place in the silence of Grey. It echoes in the twilight under the trees as Zygismunt wanders through the drifts. This is an old trick of K. Voronikin, the great entroponaut: one must speak in Greyness. Otherwise, you will fall into longing, and the past will come after you. But Zygismunt can have no fear of that. When he first entered Greysmuth, he discovered, to his great dismay, that he could not return like everyone else. Or rather, he could, but not where he wanted to go. And so he is indispensable to Mazov's cause. The disappearance of the Lund sisters literally endowed Zigui with special entroponic abilities.
    Morning ends, it begins to get dark. In a few tens of kilometers, the deep grayness begins; the time of day is no longer defined there. We need to conserve batteries. He ponders, but then turns on his flashlight anyway. The snow sparkles in its beam as Zygismunt points it at his ruthless friend. The shapeless silhouette of Ignus shines through.
    "Look at you! You're pathetic. It would have been better for everyone if they had worked out clean. What amateurism! I would have burned all the film with you. It's kind of cruel to leave you like this..."
    "But then you would never know me, Ziggy. Think of all we've been through. It wasn't all bad."
    "Am I talking about me? I'm talking about you. Wouldn't it be better if you weren't here? There was no forest of stakes, no amphetamine, no scuffed cytoplasm-who needed all that?"
    "It doesn't mean anything anymore anyway," Ignus drawled, "you know that yourself. It doesn't matter how many we've killed. Soon it will be the end of the world. Soon no one will remember me. Not to mention you. Not even the mighty will remember me.
    "That's right. It's better this way. And who is this powerful man? You vile scarecrow, the whole world was terrified of your outrages!"
    "You've been doing outrageous things, too! Look at your hand, Ziggy! Let us not forget..."
    "Well, say it! One more word and you're dead! - shouts the entroponaut. - Compared to you I have done nothing! And anyway - which of us is the commissar of the revolution? Maybe you?"
    "No!" flickered Ignus; he was frightened. - Forgive me, friend, ten thousand apologies! You alone, Sigismund Berg is the commissioner of the revolution, the head of your mind's party. I have no authority. All I have is this humble self-critical speech I composed. Accept it. But don't kill me. There is nothing on the other side of me. I'll do anything to stay. Anything, anything. I am hope."
    "You know what I want. That's the last thing. Go ahead, say it!"
    But Ignus can't talk. He has no mouth. The defect in the film shudders under the beam of the flashlight. It's the height of cruelty. He is being asked to do the impossible. There is an awkward silence in the forest air. Everyone is embarrassed.
    "Why, Ignus? - repeats the entroponaut, and comes closer to peer with his flashlight into the heart of the story. - Why did you do it, it wasn't of any use. That you were retreating, robbing banks, I realize that was necessary. Even the fact that you stole a symphony orchestra with you, forcibly. People like music, after all. But this? Who and what good does it do anybody? Why "Harnancourt," for there was no value in that model! Tell me, and you can stay."
    "But I don't know," the turned back voice says sadly, the soundtrack slowing down. - I can't know what you don't know.
    Enough talk. The Entroponaut shakes himself off. The snow crumbles off the shoulders of his anorak. He walks on, alone. Ahead, in a flashlight-lit icy rut, there are hoof tracks in the snow. Finally out of the darkness a herd of ibex appears. They stand motionless in the middle of the road, like exhibits in a natural history museum. Sometimes one of the females shudders and snorts: it is a nervous impulse, a muscle tremor. The backs of the stuffed animals are already covered with snow, but there is steam coming from their muzzles, they are still breathing: some will breathe for a few more days, some for a week. The anorak-clad figure moves with the indifference of a professional through the herd until the shadow of the leader's flashlight-lit horns falls on a wall of fir trees. Zygismunt looks into the glassy eyes of the animal. He sees a disintegrated sense of time. The automaton's primitive brain cortex is inferior to Grey's before the human's. The fringe hunters take advantage of this, preying on entrocatastrophe zones. Of course, sooner or later they go mad themselves and don't come back. But not Ziggy, who has special powers. He removes a knife from his belt and slits the throat of a squirrel body.

▲
17. HARNANCUR
⬍
    17. HARNANKUR.
   
    A hundred and fifty years earlier, on another isola, the isola Grad, in the city of Mirow, it is snowing. It is evening, the middle of winter, but the harbor is crowded with thousands of people. The pier is teeming with people, with the Imperial Grad spread out in the background - the spires of churches and chimneys. People wave goodbye to the airship as it rises into the sky. A swan of wood and nickel sails away into a snowstorm, from behind the railing of its balconies, the passengers of the world's first interisolar flight wave back to the crowd, the smart bourgeois; they have an unprecedented adventure ahead of them. This Grey is a frightening, yet so sublime, unforgettable experience. Modern technology, in the form of luxury airships, has made it accessible even to the average (though perhaps above average) citizen. And on the other side of Greyness - oh, the mystical Greyness! - Katlamaa and Vaasa, its royal capital, awaits.
    It's a landmark moment, with reporters and flash photography everywhere. Magnesium burns in the flasks, and the light makes the snowflakes freeze in the air. Likewise, the light makes Nadia Harnancourt freeze. The operetta star is pictured hand in hand with the chief engineer, she has a graceful long neck and a fluffy furry hat. She smiles and waves a handkerchief to her namesake in the sky. The flying airship bears an inscription in the old Georgian alphabet: "Harnankur". This is the pinnacle of Nadia's fame.
    Two days later, the interisolated ship entered the Grays, and less than six hours after that, it veered off course. "The Harnancourt went missing, with one thousand five hundred passengers on board. It is believed to have fallen into an uncharted area of ultra-deep Greyness.
    But who thinks so? Parahistorians. Disappearance-crazed geeks and a couple of obsessive Grey fanatics from the SNR. People like K. Voronikin, the insane Samara entroponaut-communist, or the internationally unrecognized authority on history, Inayat Khan, who may no longer be living in his mother's basement. Either way, that part of historical scholarship, which people from Khan and Voronikin's camp contemptuously call mainstream, denies the existence of an aircraft called the Harnancourt. The first civilian aircraft to make an interisolar flight was the Anastasia Lux, and it happened a decade later.
    Seventy-five years later, when the revolutions of the turn of the century had died down, Harnancourt was all but forgotten. The documentary evidence and newspaper archives were probably lost in the fires of the Graadian Revolution, but still the event was too large. If even in such insignificant cases as the disappearance of Commissar Julius Kuznicki, historical memory asserts itself with a sobering slap - where could the world's first interisolar voyage with 1,500 people on board have gone? In the post-revolutionary decades, the Harnancourt seemed to finally disappear from history. Until the fifties, when interest in disappearances among the middle class of the developed world suddenly assumed the scale of a subculture, a phenomenon in itself no less mysterious. Those dubbed desaparecidos after the bestselling book of their genre, Los Desaparecidos - mostly young men with no success with the opposite sex - noticed one photo: a certain Nadia Harnancourt, not a particularly interesting case of disappearance, standing on a pier. Wearing a fur hat on her head, she is waving a handkerchief, leaning on the arm of the chief engineer. Behind them are untold crowds of people, all waving to something in the sky. But in the sky above them there is only a mysterious void.
    This emptiness is the holy grail of the desapareticists. They believe that it is there, in the midst of the snowfall, that the most convincing of their proofs lies. The Communists took a demonstration model of the airship named after Nadia with them when they retreated from Graad to Samara, their then-revolutionary, now People's Republic. The original is on display at the Museum of Entroponetics in Sapurmat-Ulan, and the Communists take it very seriously. The only trouble is that no one takes the Communists themselves seriously. The Samara entroponaut Konstantin Voronikin in his memoirs gives the following arguments: the ship should have existed because its model is engineering expedient. In other words, it could have carried more than a thousand people across Greyland on a commercial voyage with all the comforts. Such an industrial project should have been the outstanding scientific and technological achievement of its era. Why would it have been necessary to leave unfinished work on something so commercially attractive? It would have been contrary to the principles of dialectical materialism.
    Critics say that more than two hundred expeditions to Greyness do not pass without a trace to the mind. Voronikin, however, says that the project was launched, but the ship itself - again, according to Voronikin - went missing in the first voyage. So was the project implemented? Could the Harnancourt have been some kind of failed prototype of the Anastasia Lux? Why has no documentation survived?
    Anyway, K. Voronikin argues that the model was the basis for the ship, which, in turn, deviated from its course during its flight through Grayness and encountered an unknown entroponetic phenomenon.

▲
18. THREE MEAT PIES
⬍
    18. THREE MEAT PIES
   
    One hundred and forty-eight years later, Mirova, the capital of Graad, shines outside the windows of the high-rise building. In the hot nights of history, all imperial monuments were torn down. Then the rebels were driven out, and democracy created the city anew, as a shining specter. It is a horrible, uncontrollable environment, a nonstop run of reflections on the glass walls of skyscrapers. One can only look at Mirowa in the mirror, like the monster from the myths. Its movement is the unrestrained economic growth of the Grad, which has turned into physical growth: a clear proof of thermodynamic impossibility. Subway trains glide smoothly, glittering streams of cars circle it both day and night. All this can be seen from the sixtieth floor of its nerve center, Noo. "Noo" is the financial peninsula, the pinnacle of one nation's arrogance, the nation of Graad. Local scientists claim: in the beginning, the earth was covered by the geosphere, then the biosphere; now the age of the noosphere. Intelligence has entangled the entire earth, and the Noo skyscrapers are the center of its web. The throne of the mind. Here he conducts his calculations with long-distance calls, invisible signals. His thoughts are secret financial instruments. No one knows what they are or how much they are worth. The mirrored black glass is obviously an interisolar real. But then what is man? Man is light.
    The scientific community of the People's Republic, the third generation of exiled rebels, laughs it off. In Samara, in addition to the three already mentioned, a fourth term is used: entroposphere. The wave equations, the calculations of the Samara scientists, are promising. This beautiful phenomenon may at any moment sweep away the Graad from the face of the Earth. And at that barely perceptible point where communism becomes nihilism (the line is definitely thinner than between lovers of children and lovers of children), the top of the party begins to think: why not? Our idea no longer wins your hearts - and, let's be honest, it never will. We still love the idea, and somehow the rest of the world doesn't. If that's the case, then let it disappear.
    When Saryan Hambardzumyan turns his back to the window of his apartment under the very roof of Noo, that day is only two years away. Then there will be a reunion of classmates, then the Northern Isthmus will collapse, and in the unfolding chain of events it will become obvious that what shines behind Hambardzumian's back was nothing less than the last stage of the earth's development.
    It's dark, except for the light that falls outside. It is snowing outside the windows; it evaporates in the radiation of Noo's thoughts, never reaching the street that lies sixty stories below. There will never be winter in Mirowa again. It remains only here, under the very sky. It is cool in the hall, the outlines of the columns are showing from the semi-darkness. The telephone rings. Hambartsumyan approaches, in a suit and barefoot. The shadows of snowflakes dance around, on the glass windows; in them rests the world's largest private collection of evidence of disappearances. Once upon a time, long before he became a fifty-year-old fuel oil billionaire, Hambardzumian was a young man who had no success with the opposite sex. He is one of the first. The solemn silence of the hall is broken only by the trill of the telephone. A man sits down at the table and clicks a loudspeaker key. He places his free hand on the skull of Ramut Karzai on the table. This is the original.
    "Listening."
    "Some man from Katla, Vaasa area code," the faithful secretary reports. - He says the number was given to him at an auction for private collectors, but I think he wants to ask for a loan."
    "Why?"
    "Well, it's an international call at the expense of the caller."
    Hambardzumyan laughs.
    "At the expense of the interlocutor! All right, put it together. And as for the money..." - The billionaire hesitates: one hand on Ramut Karzai's skull, the other in his gray beard. He is a huge tall man.
    "You don't lend money," says the secretary.
    "Exactly. It's fundamental. Put it together."
    The line switches to an international call, and from the cloth ziggurat of the speaker, Grayness begins to ooze into the room. The signal passes through the Great Unknown, from Catla to Graad, in an entroponic sequence. Along the way, relay stations purge speech from the noise of history, but something always remains and penetrates the wires-a ghost station. Its quiet voice in an incomprehensible language reminds you what it's here for. To end a life. "Asimuth-Boreas-Sector... " bursts onto the air on a covert radio frequency and disappears again. Hambartsumian is used to it by now. Through the static, a human voice, distorted by three thousand kilometers of Greyness, reaches him. He speaks:
    "Hello, hello, my name is Inayat Khan.
    "How?"
    "Inayat Khan.
    "Okay, Yat Han, how did you get my number?"
    "Ina-yat Khan. From the fair in Norrköping, from the auction. I was told to call you... about your hobby. Isn't that... - the man is rustling something," ...Mr. Hambartsumian?"
    "Yes, that's me."
    "Do you collect the things of disappeared people?"
    "...Gone..." - whispers Gray in the speaker.
    "Yes, I do," Hambardzumyan answers, "and no, it's not a hobby. I put my heart and soul into what I do. I take it seriously.
    "So am I. You can be sure of that.
    "Really?" "Things of Disappeared People"-well, what are we talking about! The correct term is 'evidence of disappearances.'" - Hambardzumian, in his half-darkened room, reclines in his chair with satisfaction. Well said. The chair is upholstered in expensive leather.
    "Look, I know the right term myself. - Khan is getting nervous little by little. Conversations between desaparettists are rarely heartfelt; an argument is brewing. - That thing I'm calling about isn't my first purchase. And no, I didn't buy it as a paperweight. If that's what you're afraid of."
    "And what, are you a professional collector?"
    "You wouldn't have to ask that if you let me tell you what I bought!"
    "And how extensive is your collection?"
    "You see! You won't let me speak!"
    "Why, yes, I do. But first, I want to understand who I'm talking to. - Hambardzumian does not raise his voice; only a faint tremor remains of the loser's shrill intonation. Finally, after years of training. It's like acne, but purely psychological. He has a venerable gray beard. The man strokes Ramut Karzai's skull like a cat.
    "Anyway, the crown of my collection is the Harnancourt technical model," Han announces with a shrill note in his voice.
    "Who are you there with? - a woman's voice in the background breaks the drama of the moment. - Go eat, or it will get cold!"
    Khan covers the tube with his hand, but you can still hear it in the hall:
    "Mom, I'm talking! Get out of the way!"
    "Mama," rustles through Gray, "that's my mama.
    Hambartsumyan shakes his head. He leans even lower over the table.
    "So you have Harnancourt?"
    "Yes, I have it," Khan confirms.
    "A copy?"
    "No, I stole it from Sapurmat-Ulan. Of course I don't have the original. Neither do you! - Khan takes a breath. - 'I understood correctly that you have the second copy, didn't I? That's why I'm calling. It's in the contract, the owner's responsibility. I have to get a service manual from you.
    "Do you even know what this is? - Hambartsumyan is murderously serious. - Do you realize how important this is?"
    "Apart from them, there's nothing left."
    Hambartsumyan nods slowly.
    "Right. You should... devote time to her. Take care of her. You should think of her as a girl, you know? Like a beautiful girl. Have you ever seen one? Be responsible, it's not a toy."
    "What do you mean, thinking about her?"
    "That's the instruction. You didn't think I was going to tell you about the switches, did you? For example, did you know there was a third copy as well?"
    "A third copy?" - Hahn wondered.
    "Of course they didn't... - Hambartsumyan folds his arms majestically on his chest. - Now you know: there was also a third copy. All that's left of it is an empty display case. You have to look at it. All the time. Don't lose sight of her. Don't leave her alone. And if you have to leave, think of her. You think it's just a coincidence that the original is on display in a museum? Imagine: hundreds of people walking by, every day. They look at it. And when the museum closes, the guards are watching it."
    Khan does not answer; in the ether, like a ghost, howls Gray.
    "It's an impossible object," Hambartsumyan sums up. - There is no place in the world for it anymore.
   
    Two years later. At the bottom of the valley, Greyness froze. There is not a living soul left in the forest. A chain of blood drops runs through the snow, down the dark tunnel of the road, racing against the boot tracks. Past the giant spruces, slouching under the snow, to the intersection with the highway. There, at the intersection, was a red puddle, and next to it was a smoky, abandoned campfire. Above the fire is a makeshift contraption: two sticks hold a third across over the cooling embers. There are bare bones lying in the snow.
    And onward! Along the highway, where cars no longer drive. Waves of icy wires stretch forward through the twilight. Red dots - and boot prints - run one after another across the blanket of snow. With eerie determination. In the ditch along the road, the remains of tracked machinery rest; in the background, near the bend, the outlines of a fuel oil pumping station are darkening.
    "Oreol-Laudanum-Ultra-Tricoleur-Ellips..."
    Something comes off the ground.  You can hear the scraping of metal.
   
    "Confirm that you understand what I'm talking about, and start doing it!" - Orders Hambardzumian.
    "I think so. I'll give it a try."
    "Don't try it, do it! You'll figure it out eventually. After the third one disappeared, I became paranoid, to say the least. Until I walk into the room and turn on the lights, I'm afraid it's happened again. That I'll see an empty window in the room. Or that there will be nothing in the room at all. You will have that too. Then you'll know what I mean."
    "What do you mean you're afraid it will happen again?" - Han asks warily.
    Hambardzumyan does not answer. He taps his fingers on his skull on the table.
    "What will happen again?" - Han repeats.
    "I lost it. That's what. The third one belonged to me, too. But, you see, it wasn't like it's usual when something goes missing. Keys, for example, or some expensive thing. Have you ever felt that? Experienced this phenomenon? That feeling?"
    There was no trace of the professional arrogance in Khan's voice.
    "Yes," he says.
    "So you know what I'm talking about. At least someone understands it... - The billionaire's hand slips from Ramut Karzai's skull. Outside the windows, the beams of the distant balloon's spotlight roam, the shadows of the columns creep across the floor. - When did it start?" - Hambartsumian asks.
    "Eighteen years ago. That was the first time. And since then..." - Han is silent.
    "And more and more since then, right?"
    "Yes," replies Han. - And from the rest, too."
    "What's the rest of it?" - Hambartsumyan lays his chest on the table and presses his ear to the speaker. - Or is that everything else?"
    "Yeah. The alleys, the girl on the bike, and the lights, or when some horse looks. Especially animals..."
    "The whole world?"
    "Yes. The whole world."
   
    On either side of the highway, heavy tracked vehicles, iron relics, slowly float away into the Grey. Their bodies spin helplessly in the air, the snow crumbling off their rusty frames. This is how matter decays - drop by drop, like an analogue rhythm, which pierces the colorless world with red. Letters of the international alphabet on a hidden low frequency: ". Nadir-Ellips-Gamut-Asimuth...," and so to the edge of the settlement.
    Nemengi-Uul is a ghost township. Its three-story concrete houses stand in rows on the hillsides on either side of the valley; the streets are empty. A lone bicycle hangs in the air next to a swing, but otherwise everything looks perfectly normal. Past the department store windows, past the cultural center. The trail leads to the hospital porch, and up the steps to a door with a broken lock. He is leaving... he's leaving! From the darkness of the corridor comes a whisper: "...Tricoleur-Iikon-Oreol-Nadir."
    End of message.
   
    "And so you had eighteen years? I had twelve." Hambartsumyan sinks back into the leathery depths of his chair.
    "It gets worse over time. But in the end... - Han's voice distorts into a hiss of Grayness," in the end it... this feeling... it somehow changes. It gets good."
    "Good?"
    "Yeah. Like it's going to be okay."
    "As if everything was going to be all right... - Hambardzumyan sighs. - I don't have it anymore. And it's for the best. I sold her. The remaining model. A long time ago. This endless watching, the responsibility... - he gathers his thoughts," it all wore me out.
    "Just like that - sold out?"
    "Yes, that's it - cheap, too, to the first bidder. He seemed reliable to me. He wanted it too, it was important. She needed someone who would take care of her. Someone who would look up to her a lot and not let her disappear. Like me. Still, a thousand and five hundred people..."
    "But the registry said you had it!"
    "In what registry?"
    "On the auction register," Han's voice grows sharper. - I wouldn't be talking to you otherwise! I'd be talking to the new owner."
    "I don't get it. That man should have registered it in his own name. Are you sure? - Still holding the skull in his hand, Hambardzumian stands up and walks around the table. - Perhaps..."
    "Who did you sell it to? Or don't you remember?"
    "Of course I remember," snorts Hambardzumian, "his name was Berg. A private collector."
    "Zygismunt Berg? - blurted out the speaker. - Black hair, skinny?"
    "I guess so, yeah. It was... so, when was it? About ten years ago, but yes. Sigismund Berg."
    "Are you absolutely sure? Did he use foul language? No, tell me better - did he speak with an accent? As if he were from Vaasa?"
    "Gosh, I don't remember details like that... Maybe with an accent. Why does it matter so much?"
    "And you said ten years ago? What year exactly?"
    "Fifty-nine. Maybe sixties. Why?"
    "And anyway, later than the fifty-seventh?"
    "Quite right, I have the documents. But first, be kind enough to answer," Hambardzumian orders, shaking his skull toward the speaker, "why is this so important?"
    "Because... - the voice in the ziggurat breaks off in excitement, "that in the year fifty-seven this man was murdered!"
    The billionaire giant leans toward the speaker:
    "What? What did you say?"
    But Han on the other end of the line doesn't listen to him anymore. "The lead!" - he shouts. The last thing Hambardzumian hears is a distant voice in the growing noise of interference: "Mama, Mama! I found a lead!"
   
    Two years later.
    It is night, the apron of the air station in Mirov is empty. The rest of the passengers are long gone. A magnet train clutched in the buffers hangs over the city at the edge of the platform. Five-story monoliths of carriages rise above it, and along them, through the blizzard, a robot moves.
    The sound comes closer. "Bzzzzt-zzzzzzt-zzzzt," paces the robot. The fat pilot in the cockpit on his shoulders turns the robot's head. "Tee-dee-dee-dee-dee-dee," the control system responds. The machine corrects its course, its gray herringbone coat fluttering in the wind.
    "Look, really! Maybe that's enough already," grumbles the dainty blond walking next to the robot. His head is splitting open. Six long days of drinking on the train and incessant chatter about disappearances are behind him: Hambardzumian and Zigi, the skull of Ramut Karzai and the missing airship, some "properties" of which reminded Han of the girls. But this amateur entroponetics gradually took on such an unhealthy bias that no one wanted to hear about it anymore. And then suddenly they were onstage at the Panorama Bar and singing karaoke. All three of them: "Now I'm so happy I found you!"
    "Bzzzt-bzzt-bzzt-bzzt," the robot starts walking faster instead. The pilot piles on the back of his head. This means acceleration. The robot paces, the fat man on his shoulders gyrating, the turquoise-orange-purple scarf fluttering in the wind.
    "Hydrauliczny operatywny, rozpoczynają: diagnostyków," the robot says in a swaying mechanical voice.
    "Weapon systems check!" - commands the pilot and snaps his fingers in the direction of the dainty blond.
    "Systemy broni operatywny," the robot replies. The blond man reluctantly holds out the bottle to the pilot. The fuel container is docked to the mouth of the machine. The machine gulps noisily, and drops of red nectar fall to the snow. - Paliwo rezerwuje przy: jedzicie setka procent".
    "Let's go!" - the fat man points into the blizzard.
    "Wait!" - says the robot and corrects the burden.
    "Ready?"
    "Ready. Rozpoczynają: szukają i ratunkowe protokoly!" - says the robot. But he only has time to take three steps - "bzzt-bzzt-bzzt-bzzt..." - when suddenly, far away at the other end of the platform, someone else emerges from the snowstorm. The robot fumbles, the fat man rolls off his back, and the blond man instinctively recoils. The wanted agent Teresh Maciek draws his gun - and so does the Internal Affairs officer at the other end of the platform. Behind him, two more International Police agents emerge from the snowfall, guns at the ready. They take aim, and the wanted agent Maciek aims at them.
    "It hurts to see," says the Investigator, "how low he has fallen. To think, twenty-two cases solved. And now he's obsessed with disappearances.
    The air station looms over the glow of Mirowa like a black ghost. On the open-air platform, amidst a blizzard, stands former agent Teresh Maciek. Even from here, the Investigator can see his unkempt beard, his tie slung over his shoulder, and his soaked face. Cheap berry wine runs cold on his chin, smoky teeth exposed in a smirk. His two friends gesticulate desperately, ducking in the snow. They panic.
    The investigator, as it should be, is wearing a black coat and a black suit. "You didn't think you could get away from CoMil that easily, did you?! - he shouts into the blizzard. - Put the gun down and come up here slowly, and no one will get hurt. There are twenty more people down there. You can't get away!"
    The sleeping agent shouts something, but the words are lost in the noise of the wind. The bloodhound from Internal Affairs is perking up his ears:
    "What?!"
    "Frantisek the Brave!!!" - comes from the other end of the platform along with a pistol shot.
    "No!" - Han cries out.
   
    Ziggy kicks the door. Slow down. Splinters fly, the lock rattles as it is ripped from the ground. The door swings open and hangs miserably on one hinge. In the doorway, staggering around, stands a waist-naked guy with a bottle of wine in his right hand. He is high on amphetamine and craves affection and beauty. He's seventeen, three years away from his expiration date. The guy sticks his left hand in his pants.
    "So, bourgeois bitches, who wants to get laid?"
    In front of Zygi is a solidly furnished living room. About twenty young, middle-class people who have come to the party are sitting there. Half of them are girls, but not one of them wants to sleep with Zygi. It's the evening of the next day - New Year's Eve. In two hours, the fifty-first year will become the fifty-second year, and these young men are Zygi's new classmates. Now is about the time they think that inviting Zygi was probably a bad idea.
    "Enough!" - Handsome Alexander jumps up from the couch. But he never utters: "Get out, you jerk!" He can't betray his friend Zygi-because, to tell you the truth, Zygi has no friends. In their place, Zygi has a vile scarecrow, and it shouts: "Ziggy, hit first!!!"
    A bottle of red wine flies into Handsome Alexander's face. The young man, handsome as Absolom, grabs his face.
    "God, my face!" - He looks at the wine on his hands and thinks it's blood.
    "His face!" - shrieks Alexandra, one of many girls, jumping behind the couch.
    "He smashed Alex's face..." - sweeps through the room. Handsome Alexander is blinded by grief. His wine-drenched face contorts into an incredibly beautiful battle cry. "Aaah!" - bursts out of his mouth. The boy leaps to knock Zygi to the ground, "My face! I'll kill you!"
   
    A sweaty junkie and a handsome young man in a tight shirt are fiddling on the floor. Ziggy tries to get up, but Handsome Alexander won't let him get up. Ziggy flails his fists as hard as he can. And it's still not enough. Looks like the calculation was wrong. He forgot that Handsome Alexander works out in the gym after school, giving equal attention to all muscle groups. Ziggy is in pain. A floor lamp falls to the floor. And someone's glass. The bourgeois milkmen circle around Zygi amidst the muffled, as if from under water, echoes of blows in his head. He hears voices, girls' voices. They say, "Junkie, loser!"
    Ziggy looks around with his hand, but there is no weapon in sight. Now for a sword, a beautiful sword! And a five-pointed star with rays like the sun on the hilt.
    "Shit, we've got to help Alex..." - The most determined of the boys come closer. They kick him right in the stomach. Ziggy squirms, clutching at his muscled body.
    "You are the beast. To them we have always been the game," the cytoplasm whispers.
   
    The hem of the black overcoat is flapping in the air. There's a tiny bullet hole in the matter: a futile, stupid resistance. In response, three gunpowder flashes fly into the blizzard. The former agent's kneecap explodes from the impact. The first shot knocks Teresh off his feet, the second hits his shoulder. Flying blood clots, bits of tendon.
    "F-franc... ti... " Hahn hears his friend's voice. He lifts his head from the snow-covered concrete. Teresh's blood-splattered, red hair flutters in the wind. Unclear-colored eyes tear from the blizzard. Goyko rises to one knee. The gun trembles in his hand as he pours powder into the muzzle. Ammunition cassettes roll out of his inner coat pocket, but Teresh can't find them in the puddle of bloody snow. His wounded hand can't handle the fine work of reloading. Everything crumbles.
    Three figures in long overcoats approach along the platform. Hunched over, wary, like jackals. Teresh falls on his back, tries to crawl away. A trail of blood drags across the snow behind his coat like a wet rag. The gun and ammunition remain in a smoking puddle in front of Han. The three agents run past Khan; the tails of his coat flutter like wings. The investigator falls to his knees. He swings the hand holding the gun. Dazed, Khan watches Teresh's head twitch as the angel of death strikes him in the face.
    And no one notices Jesper reaching for the puddle. Without knowing why, he hides his friend's weapon in his pocket. As if as a memento.
   
    Ziggy flies out of the gate. The two boys toss him out by his arms and legs like a sack of potatoes. He lands in the middle of a suburban street. Nearby, a picket fence whitens in the darkness. The boys walk away, leaving the gate ajar. Before the door of the house slams shut, music comes from inside. The party goes on. And then everything goes silent.
    Snowflakes sparkle. The winter night is frosty and clear, as usual in Catla; Sigi lies dead on his back under the starry sky. His body does not obey his will. Still waist-naked, he tosses in the snow. A beloved, doomed world swirls around him. In the huge, wheel-like pupils of his black eyes shine crane-like streetlights. Ziggy laughs, the dogs in the yard raise their barks. Behind them, dogs all over the neighborhood begin to bark.
    "Glorious beast," whispers the cytoplasm, "communism loves you. Get up, come back, and pour blood all over this house!"
    Ziggy picks up a handful of cold snow and wipes his face. The snow turns into cranberry mousse on the bridge of his nose. He presses the snowball to his swollen eye. It's dark, and the dog's barking reverberates in his stuffy ears.
    "Throw it out the window! Tell them they're bourgeois!"
    "They won't understand! - snapped back at Zigi. - They don't know what the bourgeoisie is! Don't you get it - it doesn't offend them anymore! They don't know what it is!"
    "Don't they know what 'bourgeoisie' is? What's that supposed to mean?"
    "So to understand," Ziggy groans and pats his fist in the snow. - To them it's just an old word, maybe even a romantic one. Like 'battle' or 'boudoir'..." - He tries to rise on his elbows, but collapses without strength. From the garden comes the creaking of snow under someone's soles.
    "They're coming to kill you! Run, beast!"
    "Quiet!" whispers Ziggy.
    Suddenly all the dogs fall silent at once. Somewhere nearby, the fabric of a light coat rustles. The smell of winter fills his nostrils, so sweet it scares him to breathe. Holding his breath, he listens to the snow creaking in the darkness. He knows what those footsteps are. They are the footsteps of doom. It will ruin him-as it has ruined Ilmaraa. There, a thousand and five hundred years ago, the original civilization fell into oblivion-vanished from history, along with its columns and ancient stringed instruments. To this day, no one knows exactly where these peoples came from. All these people. The gate creaks open. That sound is like a memory that is being erased right now while it is happening. Ziggy doesn't understand what that creepy feeling is. It must be from the Samara amph. He can't take it anymore and exhales. Silvery vapor escapes from his broken mouth.
    Perdition stands over him and breathes.
   
    Twenty-one years later, the entroponaut walks the empty corridors of the hospital in Nemengi-Uul. Two skinned goat thighs hanging behind his back drip blood on the linoleum, a canister of fuel oil in each hand. The man swings the doors open with his foot. He climbs the fire escape to a large steel door. There he finally stops and sets the canisters down. The fuel oil buzzes inside.
    The Entroponaut pulls the pliers from his backpack like a sword from its scabbard. The iron rattles. The voice of metal echoes through the stairwell of the empty hospital. He flies back through the deep Greyness, through the abandoned ghost township of panels, hurtling over the highway, over the oil pump, over the crossroads. Along the bloody path back to the fire. And on into the darkness of the forest, into the museum of natural history, where mold sprouts on the horns of the males and steam no longer rises from the nostrils of the goats. They are still breathing, but no longer with oxygen, but with pure grayness.
    The door swings open and the entroponaut enters the roof of the hospital. Greyness swirls over it. A man in an anorak wanders across it with canisters in his hands and goat's thighs behind his back. He throws the canisters and pushes them forward with his foot, the canisters slide on the snow-covered roof. The fuel oil splashes inside. The Entroponaut runs his hand over his balding hair and the ponytail of an aging rocker. In front of him, above the landing pad, hangs a tarpaulin-covered object the size of a small house.
    The backpack falls into the snow. Zygismunt grabs hold of the rope holding the tarpaulin. Oily steel slides under his gloves. He pulls on the rope, everything ripples in the fog. The carbine clicks off the ring; Zygismunt releases the rope, and it whistles out of his hands. The dark cloth soars like a bird over the fog, revealing the small craft; a bulky piece of iron, like an armored apricot bone, floats, tethered by the ropes. A stenciled inscription "Ro-501" runs along the armor plates of the craft: it is a Samara small aerostat.
    A tarpaulin flag hovers high above the hospital. Zygismunt Berg watches from the platform as Greyness thickens around him. He begins to climb up the rope.
    Only half an hour later, the sealed door opens inward. A hissing sound is heard. Oxygen leaks out of the cabin, the porthole and the instrument windows fog up from the temperature difference. A drenched Zygismunt Berg climbs through the door. The room the size of a small bedroom shakes from his efforts, the car wobbles in the air. He irritably dumps his anorak on the floor, never to wear it again. Of course, it's practical. Literally the work clothes of an entroponaut. But personally, this jacket reminds him of a perversion his eyes should never have seen: disco. One by one the man pulls the ropes tied around his waist. He says nothing, not a word, though he is covered in bruises from his falls. He doesn't even swear. First comes the backpack, then the goat legs. Finally, two canisters of fuel oil rattle against the metal hull.
    He rests exhausted against the wall for a while, coils up a cigarette and shoves it behind his ear as a reserve, and pulls out rolled-up cards. Holding a box of matches in his teeth, he arranges the maps on the instrument-lined wall of the cabin. A row of aerial photographs: the dark green taiga of Nad-Umaya, rows of concrete boxes of Nemengi-Uul. And along their edge runs the former border of the world, as if painted in gray watercolor. Where the world ends, begins a huge desert ball, mottled with azimuths, ellipses and sine waves. And far from this geometric labyrinth, in the most perfect of solitudes, in the center of the cyclone, where no direction leads, lies a chain of tiny dots, a distant constellation, a superposition. This is the end of the path.
    Rodionov's funnel lies in the heart of Grey, four thousand kilometers from the edge of the earth. The flight there could take years. The man looks at the map, and along the whitened knuckles of his clenched fingers runs a tattoo - numbers lined up in order, like pearls on a string: "5; 12; 13; 14.
    Zygismunt Berg turns the ignition key. The lights in the cockpit light up, the golden light of the fog lights flashes in the middle of the Grays. Electricity vibrates through the ship like a cat's purr; the hands behind the instrument windows bounce. Welcome, entroponaut.
    A man presses the "START" button, signed in the Samara alphabet, on the ship's Stereo-8 tape recorder. On the reel, in girlish curly handwriting, it reads: "Ziggy. Music for Flying to the End of the World." While the tape hasn't moved yet, there's a heart right above the last i in the name "Ziggy." From the speaker comes the rock music of the fifties, a now-forgotten band of alcoholic suru. A beautiful song that, alas, the bourgeois never managed to understand. Track #1, "Helvetti," was too complicated, too dark, and its lyrics were too brutal for their stiff, fetal-bubble-like musical taste. Let them go to hell. By the time Gray floods their kitchens and turns them into squirrel bodies, this ensemble, which, despite their best efforts, has never been a success with the public, will be drunk to death outside the village shop in Lemminkäis.
    Ziggy lights a cigarette. He stands in the middle of the booth in his wool sweater and nods to the beat. There it is, the real music. Tells it like it is. But there's still something missing.
   
    "Ziggy, you left your jacket!" - says perdition in the darkness in a girlish voice. But Ziggy dares not open his swollen eyes. He knows what's really waiting for him there. The smell of snow is everywhere, it penetrates his burst capillaries. Oh, bourgeois perfumery!
    "Eh-eh-eh! - sings perdition. - Your cosuka!"
    "Hey you... perdition... - sips Sigi into the dark space of winter. - Say it... the coolest cosuka?"
    "Yeah, it's just brutally cool."
    Somewhere upstairs the locks are jingling. The mouth fills with blood, a snowball melts in the eye socket. Ziggy coughs:
    "Evil doom... do you... like the leathernecks?"
    "Like."
    "And you know who I am?"
    "Of course! - perdition exclaims cheerfully. - You Ziggy's the baddest boy in school."
   
    Twenty-one years later, Zygismunt Berg opens the toolbox in the cabin. There, on top of the wrenches, lies a black leather jacket. His old leather jacket. He puts it on. It no longer fits as well as it used to on his hunched shoulders. The lock doesn't fit over his beer belly, so it doesn't matter. That's cool, too. He leaves his jacket unbuttoned. The seven white stripes on his back look as dangerous as before. Once dressed, the entroponaut walks to the blimp door and throws his ponytail over his shoulder.
    From within, the sounds of Suri rock rush into the cold Grey. A harmonica howls. You'd think Ziggy was just chewing on the doorstep.
   
    Mutta mikä on maa?
    Se on Helvetti
   
    ...he sings and taps the button with his palm. A new beat begins, and at the same time you hear the clanking of the steel structures: the propeller chassis is lowered. The ship begins to chirp to the music, its propellers opening into Grayness like lush corollas of steel flowers, the blades unfolding downward. Now comes the most powerful spot in the whole song:
   
    Se ei ole mikään kauhupaikka... **
   
    ...Zigi sings, and the familiar distorted voice joins him. Together they are strong - for the last time:
   
    Enneminkin siinnä on surullista***
   
    The ghostly gray cytoplasm of Ignus Nielsen stands below on the landing pad, amidst the unfurling propeller blades.
    Zygismunt looks at him, and Ignus looks at Zygismunt. Jets of mist flow through the shimmering heart of cytoplasm, a slightly lighter clot in a vertical patch of deep Grayness. An enemy of matter sprouts from his back like wings.
    "Communism forgives you," says Ingus Nielsen, "Communism understands.
    "Ignus," mutters the entroponaut, "forgive me.
    "Already forgiven. We had a comrade like you in Graade. His nom de guerre was Ion Rodionov. I considered him a friend of mine, too. His name must be familiar to you?"
    "Down the Funnel.
    "But do you know who he was? He was a mathematician of the revolution, headed the party with me and Mazov. No one knows about that. Nor why he took the Harnancourt model from Graad."
    "But I don't know about that either!" - The cigarette falls from Zygmunt's mouth.
    "Of course you don't know. Only the Commissar of the Revolution and a handful of cronies know about it. This man annulled himself. He devoted his whole life to it. They couldn't even accept dialectical materialism-how could we let them know about the nihilmate?"
    Zygismunt does not answer. The song ends.
    "He wanted to use it as a weapon of mass destruction. Against the world bourgeoisie. It would have been our answer to nuclear weapons. You know there is no uranium in Samara. But he never found the place."
    "Found it!" - says the SNR entroponaut. The ropes holding the balloon on the ground snap in the air like whips.
    "Too bad. I never liked that wing of materialism. It would be terrible if they were right. I love this world, every atom of it. But if the world dislikes our idea, it will be your and Rodionov's turn. After all, my name is also a battle call sign," says Ignus Nielsen, "and at least we won't be game anymore. - From the speaker comes the world's saddest moan: Track #2, "Grave," by the vanished dodecaphonist composer Count de Perouse-Mitresi.
    "Farewell, Zygismunt."
    "Goodbye, Ignus," the entroponaut says as he closes the blimp door behind him. Ignus is left alone on the roof of the hospital. "Enneminkin siinnä on surullista," the ghost manages to utter as the blades begin to move silently through his cytoplasm. But the propellers spin faster and faster.
    Zygismunt Berg stands in front of the porthole, placing his hands on the control levers. The levers grow out from under the floor, out of the gearbox, like a pair of branching horns. The man turns on the transistor radar. He tunes the machine to a hidden radio station, and from its signal, a half-wall-sized calculating machine calculates the course. The signal comes from countless points, a constellation of superposition four thousand kilometers away. The voice part of the transmission is superimposed on the vibration of the strings from the speaker. The girl with the cat-like voice repeats, in a circle, endlessly, through all time, and for her, the observer in the Rodionov vortex, it is the same, a single-moment and immeasurably complex event. A perfect closed system: "Asimuth-Boreas-Sector-Oreol-Laudanum-Ultra-Tricoleur-Ellips-Nadir-Ellips-Gamut-Asimuth-Tricoleur-Iikon-Oreol-Nadir.
    The entroponaut pulls the levers toward him and down. His eyes turn red. The small balloon takes off from the platform on the roof of the hospital. The propellers spiral Grey, and the blades scatter Ingus Nielsen into the air.
   
    The thick snow is falling, and the two men are waving their blue-red wands and flashers. They move slowly away, the platform of the magnet station disappearing into the snowstorm. Teresh opens his eyes in the sky, he can't feel his feet. Everything is spinning, and the propellers of the ambulance are roaring on all sides. In the light of the heart monitor, a man in black is leaning over him. It's an Internal Affairs officer. The angel of death.
    "My legs... - coughs Teresh," I can't feel my legs.
    "That's what happens when you open fire on CoMil."
    "You! - Teresh tries to sit up, but his wrists are strapped to the stretcher. - How...?"
    "Unfortunately, I can't answer that question."
    "Konchalovsky... - The former agent falls back onto the stretcher. - I understand, Ulrich, but... Konchalovsky doesn't exist, like you... why..." - He tries to pull his right hand out of the grip.
    "You're an addict, Macheek, that's why. People like you are always careless. How many years did you do this before that man's heart gave out? Two, five?" - The investigator rises, but then the belt unbuckles, and a hand with a drip sticking out of it grabs his tie.
    "You... - wheezed in his face, Macheek clutching his tie in his fist," you've got to help me!
    The partner draws his gun, but the Investigator raises his hand:
    "Stop!"
    "I found something! In Vaasa! On one closed investigation. Direk Trentmöller, he killed children, twenty, or even more, perhaps, and the Lund sisters, please..."
    "Get off!"
    The former agent lets go of the tie and falls down:
    "My notebook, it's all written down, promise me! If it wasn't for that, I wouldn't have escaped, you must check..."
    The angel of death stands by and wipes the blood off his tie. Somewhere underneath, Goyko is frantically searching for a notebook:
    "You can get a medal for that! A promotion for sure... - The investigator turns away, and his partner hurries to tie Teresh's arm back to the stretcher. - Please!" - comes through the noise of the engines with a disruptive voice.
    The investigator looks at the city floating under the belly of the balloon; the tie is fluttering in the airflow from the propellers.
    "Let it go, Macheek," his voice sounded almost human now. - Director Trentmöller had nothing to do with the disappearance of these children. And that's the only good thing about this story."
    Ahead, the lights of the hospital landing pad flash through the snow, and behind it the jagged throne of the LEO skyscrapers looms.
    There, the fuel oil billionaire watches the tiny glow of the ambulance balloon disappear into the blizzard on the other side of the Vera River. Before his eyes, LEO's thoughts fade; quotes fall, Grad goes to war. Tomorrow the general mobilization begins. It won't be long now. More than three thousand evidences of disappearances have lined up behind him, but this one Saryan Hambartsumian now considers the jewel of his collection.
    Under his arm rests a glass display case, a parcel that arrived by the evening magnet train from Vaasa. It is empty.


19. I AM NOT JOKING.
   
    Forty-six hours later, sixty floors below. The empty lobby of the night hotel gleams with black marble, resembling a tomb. From the front desk comes the sound of the radio: the girl listens anxiously about the Mesquite nuclear cruisers lurking in the Deep Gray - and, immediately following that, a warning about industrial espionage. They're everywhere. News from the front spreads through the lobby as a man in a windbreaker walks through the automatic door. Pushed by the wind, he runs inside; in the background you can see a light panel with a running line: "HOTEL INTERGREAD. The girl doesn't notice him, the guard is also mesmerized by fear, and the guest walks past them, toward the resident's private elevator. The doors close behind his back. Left alone in the golden light of the elevator, he slings his backpack over his chest as he was taught in sixth grade.
    "That's it, Han - that's how the tough guys wear it."
    Khan digs into the side pocket of his backpack. A metallic clinking sound is heard, and a bunch of keys comes into view. On the ring hangs a flat key from the front door of the wooden house in Salem, a round key with a double beard from the hallway, and a huge aluminum key he used to lock his basement; they are all useless scrap metal now - except for one: a gold key, whose thin stinger looks fantastically high-tech, as if turning such keys simultaneously triggers a self-destruct protocol, a "Dead Hand" type perimeter defense that guarantees a response even after the command dies in a pre-emptive nuclear attack.
    Khan inserts the doomsday key into the well and turns it as instructed: twice to the left, then to the right, again to the left. The brass plate next to the well is engraved: "Saryan Asaturovich Hambardzumyan". Suddenly the silence is broken by a muffled voice from the speaker:
    "Mr. Hambartsumian! I was worried..."
    "This is not Mr. Hambardzumian. This is Inayat Khan. - Khan raises his hand with the key, not knowing where to point it. All he looks at is his own reflection in the mirror, wearing a hat with tassels and a windbreaker, with snow melting on his shoulders. He has a beard, and he looks wild. - I was given this in case of an emergency. Like this one. Why didn't you answer your phone?"
    "You sound like Ishmael."
    "I'm sorry, what?"
    "You sound exactly like Ishmael."
    "Ahh... Do you know Ishmael?"
    "I am Ishmael," replies the faithful secretary, and the elevator moves off. The acceleration passes through Khan's body.
    "Were you worried? Why? And why didn't you answer?"
    "Я... - The secretary hesitates. - ...I haven't seen or heard from Mr. Hambardzumian for two days. His last order was to stop all calls and not to let anyone in."
    "Was it the day before yesterday?"
    "Yes, after he received your package, Inayat Khan."
    "I see," Khan nods to the mirror; drops of melted snow on the glass of his glasses. He takes off his glasses and wipes them with the sleeve of his windbreaker. - Did he get anything else? Lately? Anything from the International Police?"
    "Like I said, I haven't spoken to him since."
    "Oh, right..." - The elevator cabin slides noiselessly upward into the sky. The difference in pressure makes my ears pop. Han swallows, walks around the elevator, and stands facing the door; his backpack is still hanging on his chest.
    "Mr. Khan," the speaker suddenly whispers.
    "What?"
    "Please make sure he's okay. Tell him I really asked to be contacted."
    "Why, might he not be all right? - The ascent slows, Han's arms float to the sides as if in weightlessness. - Why wouldn't he be okay?" - he asks. But the secretary doesn't answer. The elevator doors open in front of Han: "Ding-dong..." A beam of light cuts through the darkness of the hall on the sixtieth floor. Inside, the wind howls, the bedspreads on the windows ripple like ghosts. Snowflakes fly. The world's largest private collection of evidence of disappearances is slowly being snowed in.

    *****

    The clanking of shoes on the linoleum floor can be heard. The investigator walks down the corridor of the night hospital; in his hand is a briefcase with a portable phone, chained to his wrist. A tiny blue enamel badge on his lapel gleams with the blue enamel of a forget-me-not flower. There are two policemen on duty at the door of the ICU. One is napping.
    "Asleep? - leans the Investigator to his ear. - I am a Meskian saboteur, and in this suitcase is a five-kiloton bomb. - Under his partner's startled gaze, the policeman opens his eyes and rubs them confusedly. - We have just lost the most important strategic facility in the form of the central hospital of the city of Mirowa. Three thousand Grahad civilians died. All because you're not doing your job!"
    The policeman jumps up, holding his baton to his chest; his eyes are still dazed. The investigator does not calm down:
    "Well, what are you standing up for? What's the use of sleeping standing up? Who am I? Where's my ID? Why am I without a name badge?"
    The investigator walks further into the dark hall, and both officers breathe a sigh of relief as the double-leaf metal door closes behind him. On either side of the room are booths separated by plastic curtains; in the one by the window some kind of medical apparatus glows. When he reaches it, the Investigator turns on his heels and pulls back the plastic curtain:
    "Macheek, I need you to talk your friends out of their plan. You need to call them. Now."
    At the head of the bed there is a morphine drip; you can see the drops falling down. A bad sign: there must have been no electricity for a long time. The crippled agent looks out the window, behind which there is thick snow:
    "You have nothing to offer me."
    "I don't have to offer you anything."
    "I know what you're going to tell me. "It hasn't been reported..." You don't know shit about investigations. You're a duch, sjawa. People like you do nothing but scare."
    Duch, sjawa. Unemployed citizens usually entertain themselves in this way: they like stories about "spirits" and "ghosts" who have crept into power and are weaving a web of lies around them.
    "People like you and me, Macheek. We are agents of the International Police. The task of the International Police is not to investigate. The job of the International Police is to keep the world as it is.
    Macheek looks away from the window:
    "This world of yours, as it currently stands, is complete crap."
    "Wow," the Investigator said in astonishment. - You're a philosopher. And what, you like what St. Miró is planning for humanity?"
    "The only nihilist here is you, duch.
    "So you don't like the Saint-Miro plan. - The investigator leans against the bed, his features sharpened in the greenish light of the heart monitor. - ...But you like much crazier things, don't you? Or didn't you know the kind of company your friend was mixed up with? Your crazy friend? Neither did I. What their hobbies are, what they play with..."
    Maciek lifts himself up on the bed; the bandage on his shoulder turns red from the effort.
    "Han? Han is a genius. You can't stop him."
    "Well, yeah," the Investigator shrugged, "he knows what he's doing. Unlike you. You can talk him out of it."
    Macheek has had enough of this admission of weakness.
    "No way, old man. Don't even ask. You better give me more morphine. I don't get it." - He leans back on his pillow, but it hurts to laugh, and the fun ends quickly.
    "I think you've had enough drugs."
    "Drugs..." - mocks Maciek.
    The investigator looks at him with a squeamish grimace. In front of him, on the hospital bed, lies a wet human wreck, his naked torso oozing blood and sweat.
    "And how do you like it here? Do you like it? Are you happy with your lot, Konchalovsky?"
    Teresh sways on the waves of morphine. Dark waves roll in one after another, snow flakes falling into the water. The cold burns. A chance! Children's hands pick him up, keeping him from drowning. Strong little hands... he is a soldier of love.
    "Yes," he replies, watching the green dot on the heart monitor bounce: soothingly, rhythmically. - I'm perfectly fine. They told me I wouldn't be able to walk normally anymore, but you know what? I don't have to go anywhere. I hate this country. I hate Grad. I hate the International Police and the Moralinternt. They're just tools to me, and I'm just a tool. I know... why I'm here. Who turned me in. Don't waste air, I'm not an idiot. I know my business is done."
    A glowing green line runs off into the darkness.
    "What did he get for me? Han. What did you give him?"

    *****

    The wind howls, the patterned sneaker tracks follow through the snow-covered hall. The world's leading expert on disappearances creeps cautiously forward; the focus is on snowflakes dancing back and forth. And behind them are Khan's diametrical glasses. Attentive dark eyes look around, snow flakes landing on the windows. The man slowly squats down, rustling his windbreaker. His hand reaches for something in the snow.
    The wind calms, the draperies fall lifelessly. The dark fabric takes on the shape of windows again, and among them Inayat Khan, standing on one knee, holds a human skull in his hands. He peers into the blackness of the empty eye sockets. Far, far away from here - in the Erg desert, where the hero of the epic went to ask to meet God - sixty thousand reals are scattered. Sixty thousand deep holes dug. All for nothing. Khan blows the snow off Ramut Karzai's face: his jaws are nailed to each other with steel braces, his mouth is numb forever. The spear is broken, the banner has become a shroud.
    "Mr. Hambardzumian!"
    Khan rises. On the wall, stretched on a cord, flutters a banner frayed by time. A huge tricolor flag of Ilmaraa. The wind blows through Khan's turquoise orange-purple scarf around his neck and the tassels of his hat of the same color.
    "Hambartsumian! - Khan runs his hand over the glass of the display case as he walks. A split shaft with a rusted tip emerges from beneath the snow cover. - We need to talk!"
    The ominous shadow of the tasseled hat falls on the desk: scattered papers flutter on it, the stepped pyramid of the speaker half-hidden under the snow. A shadow stretched out in a beam from the elevator suddenly leaps forward like a monster. A labored groan is heard - whoosh! The skull hits the speaker and shatters to pieces.
    "Where are my things?! Where are they?!"
    A man walks, knocking over windows that get in the way. The glass clatters and shatters.
    "I don't like it when my stuff goes missing! I don't like it at all! - He stops in front of the desk and, putting both hands on the mahogany, sweeps the papers and writing utensils off it in one motion. - How shall I know where you put them now? - He looks round. - We had an agreement, didn't we? We had an agreement, didn't we? I send a ship, you mediate, we each get what's ours. Where's my stuff?!" - he shouts. Out of the corner of his eye he sees the panoramic window. The middle pane, the largest one, is broken from the inside, the splinters pointing outward, and snow is rushing in. And the hot golden glow of Mirowa. In front of the window, half hidden in the snowdrift, a toppled display case gleams. Ripped wires, a switch.
    Khan turns and rushes to the display case; a painting hanging on the back wall, above the table at his back, becomes visible. A watercolor of Gongzi is slowly blurred on the damp, snow-crusted paper: a dragon mustache spreads like a black jellyfish over a ribbed sail, a reeded armor turns into a rainbow. Soon he will be gone, but for now you can still see him handing out peaches to his men - you and you and you - that will give them eternal life. But Han doesn't care about that anymore.
    Khan digs, and the wind whistles in his ears. He puts mittens on his hands. Releasing the display case from under the snow, Han turns it over on its base and pulls out the papers. Priceless papers. A folder with the logo of the International Police Force, an X-ray of someone's jaw; an ID photo slips out of the folder and tumbles in the wind. The blue tattoo on his knuckles is an impossible memory: "5, 12, 13, 14." Khan catches the photo and slips it into the backpack hanging on his chest, along with everything else. With a permit to enter Kukushkino, Samara Region, Grad, and fake documents of a citizen of the Samara People's Republic. They lie at the very top: the passport has a white cover, and on it is a five-pointed star with the top down.
    At the bottom of the showcase shines the grand prize, the Rodionov funnel. With his mouth ajar, Khan reaches for it. The dark blue perforated sheet of metal sings in his hands like a saw blade, the glow of the city shining through it with hundreds of dots. Under the dots is written the legend of the map - in Voronikin's handwriting. Khan reads, and the starry sky shines on his swarthy face.

    *****

    Macheek smiles sadly.
    "It's something good, isn't it?"
    Without answering, the Investigator opens a briefcase with a phone in front of Teresh. The backlight inside lights up; a notebook with an emblem in the shape of a bird - Teresh's notebook - slides off the keyboard. In between the pages is a photograph. It is no longer his.
    "It must be something very good. - Teresh thinks for a moment. - Now you have a citizen of Vaasa whose movements you can't control, right? You can't do anything to him, he's cooperating with the investigation... but he outsmarted you. You don't know what you're giving him yourself!"
    "No good, Macheek," the investigator interrupts him, "that was a mistake! I made a much bigger mistake than you think, and you won't like it. Your suspect is the victim himself. - He picks up his notebook. - Why do you think your investigation goes nowhere? You saw the whole thing, Macheek! Let's talk about it. Or don't you want to talk about it anymore? You don't want to talk about Direk Trentmöller? What, now you don't think it's funny anymore?"
    The investigator puts his palm on Teresh's flaming forehead:
    "All these things were happening, you saw them with your own eyes. And now it turns out they didn't happen. How is that possible?"
    "That's irrelevant," Teresh replies; he breathes heavily, pupils dilating, engulfing irises of indeterminate color. - You said so yourself. The only thing that matters now is Khan's plan."
    "Khan's plan is the height of insanity. Rodionov's vortex! The crazy communists, damn them, lay down their lives for it - but you all live in this world. And for some reason you think about such things, you dig into them... Do you like physical evidence? I've got one right here. It was delivered to me today, from Vaasa. I telefaxed it to myself five times. - The investigator shakes his head irritably. - Nothing has changed, the same thing has come in every time. Let me show you one picture, Macheek - since you can't act like an adult and you don't seem to care what happens to your friends after your great sacrifice. - He takes a picture out of his notebook. - It's the only thing of Trentmöller's that confirms what you say. He developed it himself in his laboratory. You saw it yourself, through your machine. The date of the development was August twenty-ninth, fifty-second year. Two days later he sent it along with the negative to the darkroom in Vaasa. "The negative is undamaged, the printing result is the same." A month later he had a second examination at the central darkroom: "Negative not damaged, same print result. Zeil confirms that the lens is not defective and Trigat shoots three hundred test frames with his camera. No abnormalities are detected. Trentmöller studied this machine for six years until he started losing his memory. If it wasn't for that, I think he would have devoted his whole life to the investigation. Like you."
    Teresch takes an unevenly cropped photo with the date and stamps on the back. "29 AUG 2052."
    "Turn it over!"
    A sweat stain spreads across the paper. Photo lab stamps: "Ceil. "Trigat.
    "You're afraid to look, aren't you? That's the way it's supposed to be. No one should have anything to do with it, no one should have anything to do with it. It should be forgotten about. But - I'm sorry, Macheek, but I need you to call your friends. You must do it."
    A glint of light runs across the glossy surface as Teresh turns the photograph over. It's a faded summer day, frozen in place. Rain falls on the bluffy shore, and they stand in front of briar bushes - three children with victorious smiles on their faces. Han is talking about Gong Tzu and peaches, Jesper and himself are looking straight ahead, arms outstretched with umbrellas. The three boys are holding beach umbrellas - over the emptiness.
    "What is it?" - The dot on the heart monitor freezes.
    "That's where your friends are going. This is your Rodionov funnel.
    "You retouched it... - Teresh turns the picture over in panic, as if hoping to find them on the back. - Why did you do that? Why are you making fun of me?!"
    "We didn't do anything. There are no 'spirits' and 'ghosts,' junkie. We are friends of humanity. When are you going to realize that already? It hasn't been retouched by anyone, not one person. You just don't want to think about it. No one wants you, and rightly so. But enough about that. - The investigator picks up the phone and presses the replay button. The dial tone sounds. Teresh turns away, but the Investigator takes him by the chin and turns him to face him. - And don't you dare hang up! You've done some good, too. You fixed those two: Heard and Trentmöller. You got that horror out of their heads. There's not much left." - On the phone, a woman's voice says: "Interraad Hotel..."
    The picture slips out of Teresh's fingers:
    "But that's impossible!"
    "Impossible," sighs the angel of death. - Only the world as it exists is possible. We don't investigate such things, we don't die for them. We humble ourselves. We forget. We wait, and we take care of ourselves."
    "Interraad Hotel, listening to you."
    "Please connect to the number 4001.
   
    *****

    "Ishmael.
    "Can you hear me?" - Han's voice echoes on the switchboard. The faithful secretary stands in front of a rack with hundreds of metal plugs sticking out of analog connectors. The lights flash. Click-click-click, a young man in a jacket, with a pink shirt visible, switches the wires with his usual dexterity: "I'm listening.
    "Mr. Hambartsumyan threw himself out the window. I hope you understand that I could have avoided informing you about it. I could have just left the building. I hope you'll take that into account and call the police in ten minutes at the earliest. Mr. Hambardzumian would have wanted it that way. So that I wouldn't be detained and the investigation wouldn't waste my time," Han dictated to the howling wind. - Time I already do not have. Do you understand me? Confirm that you understand me and do as I say.
    There is an intermittent sob-like noise coming from the speaker.
    "Do you understand me?" - Han repeats, and the speaker rustles, ". ten minutes..."
    "Good."
    Khan turns to the window. A sea of light spreads out below. Into it rushed a man who was afraid that the world would disappear, but he himself is no longer afraid of anything. Before his eyes rises "Noo," and deep behind them, behind the glass of his glasses, thoughts run. Orderly, strategic. It is a full-scale rescue operation; it has now consumed him whole, leaving not a single thought behind. He is still called Khan, but in fact he is a tactical directive, honed to perfection in twenty years of positional warfare, a multi-stage maneuver of which he himself is the author and executor: a dictator of love, a total worldview in the service of one man. There are others, but he cannot be stopped. He is haunted by nightmares; he can barely remember their names anymore, confuses their ages. Every time he falls asleep, he sees her - instead of her face, she's a lump of half-faded memories. A mnemotune of horrors. And worst of all, the nightly long-distance calls from the abyss: "You know who I am. I'm not your toy, fatso. Leave us alone!" He woke up in tears, but that would never happen again. The countermeasures are set in motion: now he knows what happened. And he will remember. Always.
    There he is, standing in the broken window of the sixtieth floor, with his time-worn turquoise-orange-purple cape fluttering over his shoulders. He's a superhero. Girls, he will save you.
    With his backpack stuffed, Han walks across the snow-covered floor to the fire escape and down to the floor below to take the guest elevator instead of the resident's private elevator. Faking a smile, he enters the elevator with the Vesper businessman and his entourage and travels nineteen floors down; on the fortieth, he gets off and wipes the smile off his face. Half an hour before the technician opens the elevator doors below--and forty-five minutes before Han steps off the parking floor onto the snow-covered street--he enters, without taking his shoes off, into a room rented in a friend's name.
    It's dark in the hallway, but Han doesn't turn on the lights. He knows what it means. On the shoe shelf are shiny suede shoes worth three thousand reais, and on the rack is a blood-stained beige Perseus Black coat, a past all too painful for Jesper.
    A telephone rings through the empty rooms. Khan enters the bedroom: it is fresh inside, the bed is made, and in the middle of the room on a white cube table there is a black step pyramid. It is stacked with coal-black bills. To the icy chime, Khan unzips the backpack hanging from his stomach, shifts the tricolor shroud into a gym bag, and begins raking stacks of notepads into his nabbush pocket. One hundred, one thousand, ten thousand, one hundred thousand, five hundred thousand reais. Eight hundred thousand reais. Underneath them, like in a tomb, rests Teresh's service pistol. It gleams nickel in the half-light as Khan picks it up. Khan places the pistol in his backpack on top of everything else and straightens up.
    He looks at the phone standing in the middle of the empty table, the red light on the phone going on and off with each ring. The phone goes silent for a while, but starts ringing again after half a minute. Han picks up the receiver and thinks. His fingers become damp with sweat. He lifts the receiver and immediately puts it back on the lever. He picks it up again and this time holds it to his ear. His swarthy fingers run over the buttons. When he finishes dialing the sixteen-digit number, there is silence on the receiver, and then there is an intermittent dial tone, a signal to the other world. And when the other side finally picks up, the room fills with Grayness through the connection. It's like a distant ocean. Through the noise of its waves comes a faintly audible "Hello?"
    "Mom, I'm not going back."
   
    *****

    Two months later, four thousand kilometers to the north, on the other side of the Jicut reservation.
    To the horizon stretches the taiga of the former Northeastern Grad, and somewhere in the immeasurable distance is a silvery curtain of grayness. And in front of him a sea of trees with an area of eight hundred million hectares is swaying in the wind. A whole world. Dotted with snow patches, the forest exhales oxygen into the darkening winter sky. Even the natives are forbidden to enter here. These icy cubic kilometers are what all of Gradirijk breathes; they are its lungs, the Lungs of Grad. A hydrometeorological reserve, an oxygen depot. On a forest road, at the edge of a huge field, stands a motocarriage the color of wet asphalt; the light in the cabin flickers. The lead-acid battery is slowly discharging. The glass hemispheres of the headlights fade in the December twilight. A pump hose pulls from the fuel tank. A thirty-four-year-old man stands in front of the open door with an empty canister in his hands. The snow-white interior smells of fuel; it drips from the white seats, the white leather steering wheel, and the dashboard.
    The man strikes a match; it goes out in his cold fingers, blown away by the wind. He covers the box with his palm and tries again. The first match fails to light a fire. With the second, the motocarpet lights up-a lone candle in the middle of a world shrouded in twilight. The white skin blackens and cracks in the fire, flakes of soot peel off and fly into the air. In the backseat, fire engulfs a white suitcase. There, his passport cover sizzles, shrinking into a lump like a dying spider; Moline's letters swirl, turned into light ash. Along with the rest of the memories that still go nowhere. Jesper sees the drawing catch fire, and Annie's birthmarks disappear into the flames. He closes his eyes and feels the heat of the flames on his face. Dots still dance under his closed eyelids; and eyes whose color can no longer be named; and a face that no longer comes to mind. A single kiss with the teacher's daughter in the forest twilight: a kiss his lips no longer remember, but without which he himself would be unthinkable. Everything fades.
    The former designer pushes back his lip, rubs his bleeding gums with cocaine, and throws the remains of the powder into the burning carriage. They burst into sparkling flames. He sprawls and jumps over the frozen creek. Stems of reeds stick out through the ice, and a country lane loops behind them. In front of Jesper there is a meadow covered in wild ruta. And beyond the meadow stands a jagged wall of spruces, a zigzag dream. The wind blows the snow off the spruce paws, and it curls through the air like wedding ribbons.
    Jesper walks forward, a blond lock of hair fluttering across his forehead, his pale blue eyes teary with the wind. He wears a snow-white overcoat, white suede shoes on his feet; the corners of his coat collar have silver anchors, a nautical motif. His silhouette whitens in the twilight, as thin as a surfboard, water bottles clinking in his shoulder bag. No one knows where he is going. No one knows where he is, a tiny white dot in a huge, frosty field. And on the other side of the field, the edge of the forest waits; the twilight under the trees is full to the brim with oxygen and beckons all life. Jesper enters the forest, the fallen needles springing beneath his feet; the wind dies down, and the bells are no longer heard. Not a single one. And it's right, it's better this way.
    The charred motorcycle remains on the side of the road.
   
    *****

    A month later, six thousand kilometers south.
    A subway train rushes underground. It is night, the cars are empty; there is a metallic scraping sound. Khan, with his backpack on his back, leans against the door between the cars. He watches as the train bends around a bend in the iron gut of the tunnel. Beside him, only a few people sit in the barely lit cars in economy mode. It's martial law in Graadirijk, and you can't go out at night without special permission. Khan bought one for himself, after he was beaten with batons by the police at the train station one night. He now sleeps on station benches or at tables in 24-hour cafes; he avoids hotels. People go missing there.
    Yellow factory light streams through one window after another as the train exits the tunnel and climbs the bridge. Below, the lower reaches of the Changing Vera, blackened by a rainbow film, rise before it, on the shore, the giant cylinders of gas tanks, rows of floodlights over vegetable plantations. A hydroelectric power plant. This is Polyfactory, a tyrannopolis, a post-megapolis, the penultimate stage of human settlement. The part of it where Han arrived was once Lenka, the capital of Zemsk. It was the birthplace of Frantisek the Brave. And Teresz Maciek, but by then Lenka had long since been swallowed up by a tumor. Grad scientists predict that in the next ten years, Polyfabric will merge with Mirova and its suburbs, forming a human settlement in the last stage of development, a no longer livable section of the geosphere, a zone of ecological disaster - a necropolis. This will happen shortly before this part of the earth is covered by Greyness.
    On the horizon, over the bay, the black carcasses of Grahad cruisers are moving northwest; clouds of fighters are flying out of their bellies like spores. These are the reserve troops. This evening the Meschian fleet has invaded the home isola of the Grad State. There is no good news from Cold Earth, either, which is on the isola of Katla. A rollover across the Polar Plateau is imminent. Outside the train window, in Polyfactory, thirty-five million people are listening to the news from the front on the radio. All of them are goyko. Only one of them does not listen to the news, he already knows what will happen. This man is a nihilist, and that's who Khan is looking for.
    He gets off at the bus stop, zippers up his jacket. The platform is empty, quiet, and cool - the end of a southern winter. The wind rustles in the bare crowns of the poplars, factory soot dripping from the branches of the trees. Khan comes down the rumbling stairs and walks down the street among the dilapidated huts. Next to them stands a garbage dump, an indestructible monument in the glow of silver cylinders of five-thousand-watt floodlights. The street itself is poorly lit, with wooden houses clustered on either side of the road, and frozen mud crunching underfoot. There is no asphalt on the road.
    Han stops in front of a particularly miserable two-story shithole. The wooden facade creaks in the wind, threatening to collapse on his head at any second. Khan checks the address, written in ballpoint pen on the back of his hand, and walks up the stairs, into the cat piss-smelling darkness of the corridor. A match is lit, and two tongues of fire dance in the bulging glasses as Han searches for apartment number three.
    An old man in his underpants opens the door, his skin hanging in folds over his chest and appearing to be embalmed. He used to be young and charming in his maximalism; he ridiculed anything and everything and was quiet about the little things that knocked the average person out of whack. This clownishness, coupled with the inherent social guilt of northern women, brought goyko the greatest fortune of his life: Zygi's mother. But their marriage turned out to be a farce. Moreover, she did not allow the nihilist to tame her as he pleased. Ziggy's father did not tame him; he took care of him. At any rate, enough to keep the boy in Vaasa. The brawling nihilist himself returned to Polyfabrikat, worked in the factory there, and was healthy enough to live into his old age, as befits a true nihilist: reveling in every repulsive hour and knowing that there were many more to come.
    Han already knows this: it's all in his backpack, laid out in folders. He wants to know what happened afterwards when Zigui returned to his father in Grad three years after the girls disappeared. What happened between them and Zigi, what he left behind. The old goiko leads him into the kitchen, littered with dirty dishes. Khan places a bottle of vodka for a hundred reais on the oilcloth, and the old man unscrews the cap, holding the shot glass between his middle and forefinger.
    "Don't get me wrong, I don't want to get him in trouble. - Han looks at the full shot glass in front of him on the table. - It's just like I said on the phone, but..." - He hesitates for a moment, then tilts the shot into his mouth.
    "The guy knows who I am. I'm a nihilist. - The old man slams his shot glass on the table. - Hurry up and see! At eight o'clock tonight, in the people's house, the mighty nihilist meets death. Death is great and terrible, but... but the nihilist doesn't... What's the rest of the story? - He puts his finger to his lips and tries to remember. But the thought has slipped away, the mood is gone, and the old man's shoulders droop dejectedly. - Who cares, it's all over soon. - The old man nods at the door, "It's just as he left it.
    Piles of notebooks pile up along the walls of the den. Han's shadow lies on the floor between them in a patch of light coming from the kitchen behind him. Han picks up one of the notebooks, and the whole stack begins to fall right on top of him. With his shoulder pressing the rickety turret against the wall, he looks back at Ziga's father for help.
    "Let them go," he coughs, "it's all the same over there. It's the same story."
    "What?" - Han takes a step back, and the notebooks sprawl across the floor: on each cover, in Zygi's sloppy handwriting, the girls' ages are written. Five, twelve, thirteen, fourteen.
    "The story, I say, is the same! - The old man turns his back to Han and sits down at the table. - It's a strange story. It's a very strange story for all of us, but it ends well now..."
    Han begins to gather his notebooks into his gym bag. As he, with the bag swollen over his shoulder, approaches the door, the old goyko is still looking outside through the small kitchen window.
    "They want to drown the whole world in Grey - you know, those Meskians. They said on the radio: they'll put troughs everywhere, and we'll sit under them with our mouths open. And they'll feed us and make sure we don't choke on our tongues. Voluntary departure? This is a circus, not nihilism, I've seen enough of this on Lomonosov's Earth, in the quarantine for squirrel bodies! And they want to make the whole world the Earth of Lomonosov".
    Han taps the toe of his sneaker on the mat by the door:
    "Well, I should probably go..."
    "That Saint-Miro is one disappointment. But you know what, kid? - The old man looks at Han with eyes as black as a horse's, gleaming with vodka. - I have a feeling there's more to it than that..."

    *****

    The cars ahead one by one plunge into darkness: the train enters a tunnel. Han sits by the window in a cotton silence: his ears are stuffy from the pressure drop. The carriage is dark except for the green exit signs; you can hear the grinding of metal. He takes a flashlight, puts batteries in it, and a world of checkered paper emerges from the darkness in his hands. Han sits on a bench, holding a stack of notebooks in his right hand, and reads.
    The story unfolds before him in the light of the flashlight, page after page. Every detail is captured with the meticulousness of an autistic person, every word and movement recorded. It is not even so much a story as a technical drawing, a layout of a single memory, addressed to some benevolent force from the future, which could reassemble from it the lost world of Sigismund Berg. Cut, bend, glue. The trajectory of the flight of a brick launched on a winter night into the living room window of a familiar address, the address of the girls' home in Vaasa, at the Fahlu stop. A maze of suburban streets on an unfolding tab, and on it, marked with a dotted line, the path of the fleeing boy. And meteorological information in the corner of the page. Pressure, humidity. Eighteen degrees below zero. The next evening at Handsome Alexander's: couches against the wall, on the floor, a pattern of fights - like steps in a dance. And then the great darkness. Only a voice ringing above him, that boy, along with the locks of his jacket. "You Ziggy are the baddest boy in school." Han is seized by a bad feeling; he pulls out a handkerchief and wipes his glasses, acid bubbling in his stomach. It's an impending fit of jealousy.
    "And you, evil doom, are the prettiest girl in school."
    But the next page doesn't have a name with the familiar horns of the letter M at the beginning waiting for Han. There awaits his absence. Neither he nor the world around him is there anymore: the dates on the pages go from the new year, one or two a week, less and less frequently. Until the twenty-eighth of August. But the pages are nothing but empty cells. Han grabs the next notebook and flips through it, then the next; he turns the remaining notebooks out of his backpack, and in all of them is the same story. It's a strange story.
    The light from the platform pierces through the cars. It pierces through the windows, one by one. Han raises his head, and his glasses flash-two glowing portholes at the terminus.  The fat idiot in the blue tie - he doesn't understand anything. Somewhere out there is Zygismunt Berg, who knows that all that's left of his story is an empty husk. A magnetic tape rustles, a heart on a plastic disc spins. And he's also left with numbers, inseparable from the world to the very end--to which he catapulted himself through the ultra-deep Grayness in his steel apricot bone. But Han's own memories are already distorted in his mind. The backups have disappeared, one by one, leaving him alone. He can't hold them alone, but he can't do it without them.
    This evening he falls asleep in the train station bathroom, in a stall of thin plywood. He curls up behind the locked door, huddled against the wall, his body wrapped in a time-worn three-color shroud. A fringe sweeps across the floor as he tosses restlessly from side to side. He cannot sleep, Something is wrong. Terribly wrong. "Tell me something... you always have such interesting reports. Both history and science..." He opens his eyes and looks at the shapeless stump in place of her face, her smooth blond hair scattered across the tile. The girl lies on the floor, right in front of him. Not breathing, not smelling.
    "Where are you?" - A low vibration, the invisible lover does not answer. Han struggles to shrink into a lump, but the cold won't let him go. He repeats, "I am at the end of the world. I am where the world ends."
   
    *****
   
    Twenty-one years ago, little bare feet walk down the stairs of a house in the suburbs. It is the night of the winter solstice. Vessels shine through the translucent skin, toes taut on the cold steps, each fingernail a crimson-red gem. Dark green eyes. The edge of her nightgown coils around her ankles from the draught.
    Moline Lund steps from the last step onto the carpet. In the dark room in front of her, a broken window glows. The curtain swells like a sail, bricks are lying on the floor, and the doors to the hallway are open. She is a mirror, a mirror! a perfect replica of the world. But there is something wrong with her. There has always been something wrong with her. Her surface is flawless, untouched, radiantly clean. She is the lost light. She is the world.
    Nearby, two more teenage girls emerge from the darkness. A fourth girl, just a baby, is holding the older one's hand. She points her stepmother's wand at the window, at the grinning frame with the broken glass.
    "Look, look! - she says. - It's all broken."

▲
20. EPILOG. LIGHT PERVADES EVERYTHING
⬍
20. LIGHT PERVADES EVERYTHING.

    Revashol, seventy-five years ago, two years before the revolutions of the turn of the century.
    From afar, in the Philharmonic Hall, backstage applause can be heard. They are rather sparse for a premiere; there is no second encore. The first one was given by the cluckers. The string section is already changing their evening dresses for casual wear on the silver sofas with curved armrests. Outside the window, the evening January sky is darkening. At the window stands Count Emile de Perouse-Mitresi, in a black redingote, with frizzed-up curls and a dodecahedron in his hand.
    Emile is a contradictory personality. He is an aristocrat, Count de Perouse, Count de Mitresi - but his hatred of the bourgeoisie, which has usurped the top of the class ladder, makes him a supporter of the proletariat and, as a consequence, of the revolution. From his idle life, Emile fancies himself also a composer. He is morbidly ambitious, yet determined to conquer the world with his dodecaphonic music. Count's method is based on a dazzlingly progressive geometric-symbolic system of harmonies that has nothing to do with the music of the rest of the civilized world. To the human ear it sounds like an unbearable rattle. Emile considers traditional tonal harmony as limited as a fetal bubble. A dumbing down babble. The music of amoebas. He conducts his works himself - no one else can or wants to do it - using a cardboard dodecahedron instead of the usual stick. The Earl's cheeks glow with excitement, the dodecahedron trembles in his hand.
    "Come out again? - he shouts. - I'll go!"
    He rushes through the room as if driven by fever. The orchestra director delicately stops the Count at the door:
    "I don't know, I don't think you should..."
    "But why? - The count is perplexed. A wry smile appears on his lips. - My name is called! That was grand!"
    "Grandiose... - scratches the back of his head the director. - Well, let's suppose, but you've already been out... It wouldn't be too tactful to test the politeness of the public."
    It gets quiet in the hall. Outside the window, the wind rustles.
    "I don't think it's that bad. - A chubby colleague puts his hand on the composer's shoulder. - The idea was good. The execution could have been improved. But, you know, it all worked out quite well. What if it doesn't happen again? Next time you'll perfect it, and then...!" - This man writes mostly concertos for flute and orchestra and pieces for flute solo.
    "Well, yeah... Next." - The director scratches the back of his head again. The Count hears him whisper to the critic, "Perhaps it would be better if you didn't write about it. Perus-Mitresi has been generous to our establishment for many years..."
    A pained shiver runs down the count's flushed face. The fading smile still lingers on his lips. Unnoticed, he walks past the bustling women back to the window. He can still hear the director's ingratiating whisper and the critic's voice. Too incomprehensible... Will never be popular, it's creepy to hear." Behind the glass, against the dark blue evening sky, tree branches sway.
    "It's creepy to hear... - whispers the count. There is a metronome on the windowsill. The count starts it - at the pace of grave, the slowest possible. - will not be popular..."
    "But listen! - The concertmaster objects. - I think the Count has a unique musical language!"

    The opulent lady looks at the count:
    "I sincerely hope there will be a next time. Still, it's better if it's something more understandable.
    Laughter breaks out. A sigh of relief spreads through the dressing room.
    "It worked out pretty well... - mutters the count. He turns around slowly and looks at the people in the room through the curls that have fallen on his forehead. - I mean, I'm the only one who thinks it's grand, right?"
    "So," replies the metronome; behind the Count's back, branches sway.
    "I thought it was pretty original," says the concertmaster. - And yes, some of the moments were really good.
    "Moments... successful," pronounces the count.
    "So," says the metronome.
    Count tosses a dodecahedron in his hand.
    "И... what were your favorite moments?"
    "Well, the beginning of the second part was beautiful... - The lady picks the case of her violin. - И..."
    "So."
    "So."
    "So."
    "Asimuth!" - The silence is broken by a clap of the hands.
    "So."
    "Boreas! Sector! - Flashing his eyes, a tiny man bursts into the room. He claps his hands with each beat, and with each step he utters one word. - Nadir! - the little man finishes and bows to the count. - Every part, every single one, is absolute mathematical perfection. The next performance will only spoil it. It is better to disappear right now: there is nothing left to add to it."
    The man clenches his tiny hands into fists; there are patches on the elbows of his velvet suit.
    "I'm going back to the Grad. - He turns to the others. - In two years, a revolution will begin in Mirowa that will engulf the world like a conflagration. Its defeat will define the entire century that follows. The creative peak of the human mind, each successive year darker than the last. - The little man wanders around the room like ball lightning: it seems as if he is about to throw himself at someone. - This music comes from his end, through the polar night. It plays from the sound media of the future. From magnets! But its real source is not there. You will be famous, Monsieur Mitresi, your music will reach us from the right side, from beyond, where all matter turns into memory. This is how the white light that shines in every darkness, the light that cancels all revelation, sounds." - He rises on his tiptoes in front of the critic and says to his face, "All revelation-all, I tell you, will turn to nothing!"
    "So."
    The little man turns over his shoulder like an owl. His gaze wanders around the room, looking for a lightning rod, and bumps into the Count. The composer smiles from ear to ear.
    "So I'm going to be famous after all? - asks the count, gasping with excitement. - Do you really think that will happen?"
    "I'm sure of it. For on the other side of the world..."
    "Ion! - interrupts him with a child's voice. - Ion, when are we going to go..." a little boy in a smart suit appears in the doorway.
    "Please excuse me. - The man shakes the count's hand. - It is a great honor to meet a man whose mind takes in sounds so vivid that in their light one can see the nature of the world as a collection of memories!"
    "Wait a minute! - The composer is embarrassed. He takes a simple pencil out of his inner redingote pocket and signs the dodecahedron. He's been practicing this for a long time. - Who does he sign it to?"
    "Ion Rodionov," the little man smiles. He is excited.
    "Do you happen to be writing anywhere?"

    "Oh, no, I'm not a critic. - The man takes the polyhedron in his hands: he even cried with delight. - I am a mathematics teacher.
    "Of course!" - pouting, snorts the critic at the door.
    But the teacher passes by without hearing him. He takes the hand of the little student waiting outside the door.
    "Come, Ambrosius! - he says. - Isn't it a beautiful polyhedron?"

    *****
   
A month later, eight hundred kilometers from Revachol, in the Great Blue, at the very edge of the archipelago.
    The wind viciously flutters the sail of the yacht. The fabric flaps, the wind howls deafeningly. It is late February, madrugada - the last dark blue hour before sunrise. The ocean is silvery under the dark sky, a lone yacht maneuvers between the ice blocks. A block of ice floats behind the railing, fuming in the darkness. On deck stands Count Emile de Perouse-Mitresi. He wears the same black redingot, worn and frayed. His hair is flapping in the wind and his hands are red with cold. They froze at the helm.
    "Get lost, Revachol! May you burn! - he shouts to the wind. - I know it's grand; the world knows it's grand! And who are you?"
    The yacht hits an ice floe. The ice scrapes deafeningly against the wooden board. The Count pulls the cork out of the spirit bottle with his teeth.
    "Don't you get it?! - he shouts and takes a sip. - I bring you the music of the spheres, and you don't understand! You incomprehensible bastards!"
    In front of him, on the other side of the vast dark world, the sun rises. The sight is stunning. Sheaves of cold light gray cold rays spread out to the sides like a crown. The sun rises through the Grey. The Count raises his hands to the sky; he is overwhelmed by the incomparable sound of time. It is louder than the wind, louder than the crack of colliding ice. Salivating, the Count sings his favorite cadenza. He composed it himself. And Gray's voice ahead sounds like applause, a standing ovation, the stomping of tens of thousands of feet, the whistling and deafening rumble of fireworks, the atom that will one day explode in Revachol. If there is anything in the world more beautiful than the music he wrote, it is applause.
    "I am famous! - shouts at the top of his voice. I am the most famous musician of all time! All other musicians are nothing compared to me! Who knows them?! Nobody! But everybody knows me!"
    He finishes his alcohol and smashes the bottle on the deck.
    "I am loved by millions! - he screams, deliriously stretching out his hand to Grey. - Millions and billions, hundreds of thousands of billions of young and amorous girls love me and my dodecaphonic music! Love is everything! Love is light! Light - and nothing else!"
